ORIGINAL	TRANSLATED
Amory Blaine inherited from his mother every trait, except the stray inexpressible few, that made him worth while. His father, an ineffectual, inarticulate man with a taste for Byron and a habit of drowsing over the Encyclopedia Britannica, grew wealthy at thirty through the death of two elder brothers, successful Chicago brokers, and in the first flush of feeling that the world was his, went to Bar Harbor and met Beatrice O’Hara	Amory Blaine got all the good things about him from his mother, except for a few special qualities that are hard to explain. His dad was kind of a quiet, unsuccessful guy who liked Byron's poetry and often fell asleep reading the Encyclopedia Britannica. He got rich at thirty when his older brothers, who were successful stockbrokers in Chicago, died. Feeling like he could do anything, he went to Bar Harbor and met Beatrice O'Hara.

In consequence, Stephen Blaine handed down to posterity his height of just under six feet and his tendency to waver at crucial moments, these two abstractions appearing in his son Amory. For many years he hovered in the background of his family’s life, an unassertive figure with a face half-obliterated by lifeless, silky hair, continually occupied in “taking care” of his wife, continually harassed by the idea that he didn’t and couldn’t understand her. But Beatrice Blaine! There was a woman! Early pictures taken on her father’s estate at Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, or in Rome at the Sacred Heart Convent—an educational extravagance that in her youth was only for the daughters of the exceptionally wealthy—showed the exquisite delicacy of her features, the consummate art and simplicity of her clothes	So, Stephen Blaine passed on two things to his son Amory: his height (just under six feet) and his tendency to be indecisive when it mattered most. Stephen was always kind of in the background of his family's life. He was quiet and his face was partly hidden by his thin, silky hair. He was always busy "taking care" of his wife, but he always felt like he didn't really get her. But Beatrice Blaine, now she was something else! Old photos of her at her dad's place on Lake Geneva, or from when she was at that fancy boarding school in Rome (a really expensive thing back then, only for rich girls) show how beautiful she was and how simple, yet elegant, her clothes were.

A brilliant education she had—her youth passed in renaissance glory, she was versed in the latest gossip of the Older Roman Families; known by name as a fabulously wealthy American girl to Cardinal Vitori and Queen Margherita and more subtle celebrities that one must have had some culture even to have heard of. She learned in England to prefer whiskey and soda to wine, and her small talk was broadened in two senses during a winter in Vienna. All in all Beatrice O’Hara absorbed the sort of education that will be quite impossible ever again; a tutelage measured by the number of things and people one could be contemptuous of and charming about; a culture rich in all arts and traditions, barren of all ideas, in the last of those days when the great gardener clipped the inferior roses to produce one perfect bud. In her less important moments she returned to America, met Stephen Blaine and married him—this almost entirely because she was a little bit weary, a little bit sad	She had an amazing education. Her youth was like living in a golden age. She knew all the latest dirt on the important old Roman families. Famous people like Cardinal Vitori and Queen Margherita knew her as that super-rich American girl. And there were other, less famous but still important people that only someone with a good education would even know about. In England, she picked up a taste for whiskey and soda instead of wine. And during a winter in Vienna, her small talk became both longer and more sophisticated. Basically, Beatrice O’Hara got the kind of education you just can't get anymore. It was an education judged by how many things and people you could be both dismissive and charming about. Her culture was full of art and tradition, but empty of new ideas. It was at the end of an era when the powerful were getting rid of anything they saw as lesser to create something perfect. When she wasn't doing anything too important, she came back to America, met Stephen Blaine, and married him. She did this mostly because she was a little tired and a little down.

Her only child was carried through a tiresome season and brought into the world on a spring day in ninety-six. When Amory was five he was already a delightful companion for her. He was an auburn-haired boy, with great, handsome eyes which he would grow up to in time, a facile imaginative mind and a taste for fancy dress. From his fourth to his tenth year he did the country with his mother in her father’s private car, from Coronado, where his mother became so bored that she had a nervous breakdown in a fashionable hotel, down to Mexico City, where she took a mild, almost epidemic consumption	She had her only child after a long and difficult pregnancy, and he was born in the spring of 1896. By the time Amory was five, he was already fun to be around. He was a boy with reddish-brown hair, and big, beautiful eyes that he'd eventually grow into. He was imaginative and loved dressing up. From ages four to ten, he traveled around with his mother in her father's private train car, from Coronado, where she got so bored she had a breakdown at a fancy hotel, all the way to Mexico City, where she caught a mild case of tuberculosis.

This trouble pleased her, and later she made use of it as an intrinsic part of her atmosphere—especially after several astounding bracers. So, while more or less fortunate little rich boys were defying governesses on the beach at Newport, or being spanked or tutored or read to from Do and Dare, or Frank on the Mississippi, Amory was biting acquiescent bellboys in the Waldorf, outgrowing a natural repugnance to chamber music and symphonies, and deriving a highly specialized education from his mother	This problem made her happy, and later she used it to create her unique vibe—especially after a few strong drinks. So, while lucky rich kids were rebelling against their nannies on the beach in Newport, or getting punished, tutored, or read adventure stories, Amory was playfully biting willing hotel employees at the Waldorf, starting to enjoy classical music, and getting a very particular education from his mother.

“Amory.” “Yes, Beatrice	"Amory." "Yeah, Beatrice?"

(Such a quaint name for his mother; she encouraged it.) “Dear, don’t think of getting out of bed yet	"Honey, don't even think about getting up."

I’ve always suspected that early rising in early life makes one nervous. Clothilde is having your breakfast brought up.” “All right.” “I am feeling very old today, Amory,” she would sigh, her face a rare cameo of pathos, her voice exquisitely modulated, her hands as facile as Bernhardt’s	I always thought waking up early when you're young makes you anxious. Clothilde is having your breakfast sent up." "Okay." "I feel really old today, Amory," she'd sigh, her face looking sadly beautiful, her voice perfectly controlled, and her hands as expressive as Bernhardt's.

“My nerves are on edge—on edge. We must leave this terrifying place tomorrow and go searching for sunshine	I'm super stressed out, like, totally on edge. We gotta get out of this awful place tomorrow and find some sunshine.

Amory’s penetrating green eyes would look out through tangled hair at his mother. Even at this age he had no illusions about her. “Amory	Amory's sharp green eyes peeked out from under his messy hair, watching his mother. Even as a child, he understood her pretty well.

“Oh, yes.” “I want you to take a red-hot bath as hot as you can bear it, and just relax your nerves. You can read in the tub if you wish.” She fed him sections of the Fêtes Galantes before he was ten; at eleven he could talk glibly, if rather reminiscently, of Brahms and Mozart and Beethoven	"Okay," she said. "I want you to take a really hot bath, as hot as you can handle, and just chill out. You can even read in the bath if you want." She introduced him to the "Fêtes Galantes" poems before he was ten. By eleven, he could talk easily about Brahms, Mozart, and Beethoven, although he mostly repeated what he'd heard before.

One afternoon, when left alone in the hotel at Hot Springs, he sampled his mother’s apricot cordial, and as the taste pleased him, he became quite tipsy. This was fun for a while, but he essayed a cigarette in his exaltation, and succumbed to a vulgar, plebeian reaction	One afternoon, alone in the hotel in Hot Springs, he tried his mother's apricot drink. He liked it, so he drank enough to get a little drunk. That was fun at first, but then he tried to smoke a cigarette while feeling good, and he ended up feeling sick and awful.

Though this incident horrified Beatrice, it also secretly amused her and became part of what in a later generation would have been termed her “line.” “This son of mine,” he heard her tell a room full of awestruck, admiring women one day, “is entirely sophisticated and quite charming—but delicate—we’re all delicate; here, you know	Even though this event shocked Beatrice, it also secretly entertained her and became part of her "thing," what later generations would call her "shtick." One day, someone heard her say to a room full of amazed, admiring women, "This son of mine is totally worldly and very charming—but he's fragile—we're all fragile, you know?"

Her hand was radiantly outlined against her beautiful bosom; then sinking her voice to a whisper, she told them of the apricot cordial. They rejoiced, for she was a brave raconteuse, but many were the keys turned in sideboard locks that night against the possible defection of little Bobby or Barbara. These domestic pilgrimages were invariably in state; two maids, the private car, or Mr. Blaine when available, and very often a physician.	Her hand glowed against her chest. She whispered about the apricot liqueur. Everyone was happy because she told great stories. But later, people locked up their liquor cabinets, just in case their kids, Bobby or Barbara, tried to sneak some. These trips back home were always a big deal, involving two maids, a private train car (or Mr. Blaine, if he was free), and usually a doctor.

When Amory had the whooping-cough four disgusted specialists glared at each other hunched around his bed; when he took scarlet fever the number of attendants, including physicians and nurses, totalled fourteen. However, blood being thicker than broth, he was pulled through	When Amory had the whooping cough, four annoyed doctors stared at each other, gathered around his bed. When he got scarlet fever, fourteen people, including doctors and nurses, took care of him. But because family is important, he recovered.

The Blaines were attached to no city. They were the Blaines of Lake Geneva; they had quite enough relatives to serve in place of friends, and an enviable standing from Pasadena to Cape Cod	The Blaines didn't really belong anywhere. They were known as the Blaines of Lake Geneva. They had so many relatives that they didn't need friends, and everyone respected them, from California to Massachusetts.

But Beatrice grew more and more prone to like only new acquaintances, as there were certain stories, such as the history of her constitution and its many amendments, memories of her years abroad, that it was necessary for her to repeat at regular intervals. Like Freudian dreams, they must be thrown off, else they would sweep in and lay siege to her nerves. But Beatrice was critical about American women, especially the floating population of ex-Westerners. “They have accents, my dear,” she told Amory, “not Southern accents or Boston accents, not an accent attached to any locality, just an accent”—she became dreamy	Beatrice increasingly preferred making new friends because she needed to tell certain stories over and over, like her health problems and her time living overseas. She had to get them off her chest, like in Freudian dreams, or they'd overwhelm her. But Beatrice judged American women, especially those who used to live out West and now traveled a lot. "They have strange ways of talking, honey," she told Amory, "not accents from the South or Boston, not an accent that comes from anywhere specific, just... an accent." Then she drifted off into thought.

“They pick up old, moth-eaten London accents that are down on their luck and have to be used by someone. They talk as an English butler might after several years in a Chicago grand-opera company	They start using old-fashioned, worn-out British accents that nobody wants anymore. They sound like a British butler who's spent years working for a fancy opera company in Chicago.

She became almost incoherent—“Suppose—time in every Western woman’s life—she feels her husband is prosperous enough for her to have—accent—they try to impress me, my dear—” Though she thought of her body as a mass of frailties, she considered her soul quite as ill, and therefore important in her life. She had once been a Catholic, but discovering that priests were infinitely more attentive when she was in process of losing or regaining faith in Mother Church, she maintained an enchantingly wavering attitude. Often she deplored the bourgeois quality of the American Catholic clergy, and was quite sure that had she lived in the shadow of the great Continental cathedrals her soul would still be a thin flame on the mighty altar of Rome. Still, next to doctors, priests were her favorite sport	She started rambling, saying something like, "You know, there's a time when every woman thinks her husband makes enough money so she can get an accent. They try to show off to me, darling." Even though she knew her body was weak, she thought her inner self was just as messed up and, therefore, just as important. She used to be Catholic, but realized priests paid way more attention to her when she was deciding whether to believe in the Church again. So, she pretended to be constantly unsure about her faith. She often complained about how uncultured American Catholic priests were. She was convinced that if she'd lived near the famous cathedrals in Europe, she would still be a devout Catholic. But, besides doctors, priests were her favorite people to tease.

“Ah, Bishop Wiston,” she would declare, “I do not want to talk of myself. I can imagine the stream of hysterical women fluttering at your doors, beseeching you to be simpatico”—then after an interlude filled by the clergyman—“but my mood—is—oddly dissimilar.” Only to bishops and above did she divulge her clerical romance. When she had first returned to her country there had been a pagan, Swinburnian young man in Asheville, for whose passionate kisses and unsentimental conversations she had taken a decided penchant—they had discussed the matter pro and con with an intellectual romancing quite devoid of sappiness	"Oh, Bishop Wiston," she'd say, "I don't want to talk about me. I can just picture all those emotional women crowding around you, begging you to understand them." After the bishop would say something, she'd add, "But my mood is...completely different." She only told bishops and higher-ups about her love affair with a clergyman. When she first came back to the States, there was this wild, rebellious guy in Asheville she really liked for his intense kisses and realistic conversations. They debated their relationship, keeping it intellectual and avoiding being overly sentimental.

Eventually she had decided to marry for background, and the young pagan from Asheville had gone through a spiritual crisis, joined the Catholic Church, and was now—Monsignor Darcy. “Indeed, Mrs. Blaine	Finally, she chose to marry someone for his family and social standing. The wild guy from Asheville had a personal crisis, became Catholic, and is now a high-ranking priest, Monsignor Darcy. "Yes, Mrs. Blaine?"

He is still delightful company—quite the cardinal’s right-hand man.” “Amory will go to him one day, I know,” breathed the beautiful lady, “and Monsignor Darcy will understand him as he understood me.” Amory became thirteen, rather tall and slender, and more than ever on to his Celtic mother. He had tutored occasionally—the idea being that he was to “keep up,” at each place “taking up the work where he left off,” yet as no tutor ever found the place he left off, his mind was still in very good shape	"He's still fun to be around—like the cardinal's top assistant." "Amory will go to him someday, I'm sure," the beautiful woman whispered, "and Monsignor Darcy will get him, just like he got me." Amory turned thirteen, pretty tall and thin, and even more like his Irish mom than before. He'd had tutors now and then—the plan was for him to "stay sharp," and at each new place to "pick up where he left off." But since no tutor could ever figure out where he'd left off, his brain was still in pretty good condition.

What a few more years of this life would have made of him is problematical. However, four hours out from land, Italy bound, with Beatrice, his appendix burst, probably from too many meals in bed, and after a series of frantic telegrams to Europe and America, to the amazement of the passengers the great ship slowly wheeled around and returned to New York to deposit Amory at the pier. You will admit that if it was not life it was magnificent	It's hard to say what would have become of him if he'd kept living like that. But, here's what happened: four hours into a trip to Italy with Beatrice, his appendix burst, probably from eating too much in bed. After a bunch of desperate telegrams to Europe and America, the ship, shockingly, turned around and went back to New York to drop Amory off. You have to admit, even if it wasn't ideal, it was pretty dramatic.

After the operation Beatrice had a nervous breakdown that bore a suspicious resemblance to delirium tremens, and Amory was left in Minneapolis, destined to spend the ensuing two years with his aunt and uncle. There the crude, vulgar air of Western civilization first catches him—in his underwear, so to speak.	After her surgery, Beatrice had a mental breakdown that seemed a lot like she was going crazy from alcohol withdrawal. Amory was stuck in Minneapolis and would be spending the next couple of years with his aunt and uncle. That's where he first experienced the rough and unsophisticated culture of the Midwest – completely unprepared.

His lip curled when he read it. “I am going to have a bobbing party,” it said, “on Thursday, December the seventeenth, at five o’clock, and I would like it very much if you could come. Yours truly, Myra St. Claire	He frowned when he read the note. It said, "I'm having a bobbing for apples party on Thursday, December 17th, at 5:00 PM, and I'd really like you to come. Sincerely, Myra St. Claire."

He had been two months in Minneapolis, and his chief struggle had been the concealing from “the other guys at school” how particularly superior he felt himself to be, yet this conviction was built upon shifting sands. He had shown off one day in French class (he was in senior French class) to the utter confusion of Mr. Reardon, whose accent Amory damned contemptuously, and to the delight of the class	He'd been in Minneapolis for two months, mostly trying to hide how much smarter he thought he was than the other kids at school. But he wasn't really sure of himself. One day, he showed off in French class (he was in the advanced class), totally embarrassing Mr. Reardon because Amory hated his accent. The class loved it, though.

Mr. Reardon, who had spent several weeks in Paris ten years before, took his revenge on the verbs, whenever he had his book open. But another time Amory showed off in history class, with quite disastrous results, for the boys there were his own age, and they shrilled innuendoes at each other all the following week: “Aw—I b’lieve, doncherknow, the Umuricun revolution was lawgely an affair of the middul clawses,” or “Washington came of very good blood—aw, quite good—I b’lieve	Mr. Reardon, who'd been to Paris for a few weeks a decade ago, really went after the verbs in grammar, every time he looked at his textbook. But another time, Amory tried to show off in history class, and it backfired badly. Since the other guys were his age, they made snide comments about it all week: "Oh, I *think* the American Revolution was mostly a middle-class thing, you know?" or "Washington was from a *really* good family, you know, very posh, I *think*."

Amory ingeniously tried to retrieve himself by blundering on purpose. Two years before he had commenced a history of the United States which, though it only got as far as the Colonial Wars, had been pronounced by his mother completely enchanting. His chief disadvantage lay in athletics, but as soon as he discovered that it was the touchstone of power and popularity at school, he began to make furious, persistent efforts to excel in the winter sports, and with his ankles aching and bending in spite of his efforts, he skated valiantly around the Lorelie rink every afternoon, wondering how soon he would be able to carry a hockey-stick without getting it inexplicably tangled in his skates	Amory cleverly tried to recover by messing up on purpose. Two years earlier, he'd started writing a U.S. history, which, even though it only covered the Colonial Wars, his mother thought was amazing. His biggest problem was sports, but once he realized that being good at sports meant you were popular and powerful at school, he tried really hard to get good at winter sports. So, with his ankles hurting and bending, he skated bravely around the Lorelie rink every afternoon, wondering when he'd be able to hold a hockey stick without tripping over his own feet.

The invitation to Miss Myra St. Claire’s bobbing party spent the morning in his coat pocket, where it had an intense physical affair with a dusty piece of peanut brittle. During the afternoon he brought it to light with a sigh, and after some consideration and a preliminary draft in the back of Collar and Daniel’s First-Year Latin, composed an answer: My dear Miss St. Claire: Your truly charming envitation for the evening of next Thursday evening was truly delightful to receive this morning	He had an invitation to Myra St. Claire's party in his pocket all morning, getting stuck to a piece of peanut brittle. In the afternoon, he took it out with a sigh. After thinking about it and writing a practice version in the back of his Latin textbook, he wrote back: Dear Miss St. Claire, I was so happy to get your lovely invitation for Thursday night.

I will be charm and inchanted indeed to present my compliments on next Thursday evening. Faithfully, Amory Blaine	I'd be really happy to come by and say hello next Thursday evening. Sincerely, Amory Blaine.

On Thursday, therefore, he walked pensively along the slippery, shovel-scraped sidewalks, and came in sight of Myra’s house, on the half-hour after five, a lateness which he fancied his mother would have favored. He waited on the doorstep with his eyes nonchalantly half-closed, and planned his entrance with precision.	So, on Thursday, he walked thoughtfully down the slick, shoveled sidewalks and saw Myra's house. It was about 5:30, which he thought his mom would approve of. He waited on the porch, eyes half-closed like he didn't care, and carefully planned what he would say when he went inside.

He would cross the floor, not too hastily, to Mrs. St. Claire, and say with exactly the correct modulation: “My dear Mrs. St. Claire, I’m frightfully sorry to be late, but my maid”—he paused there and realized he would be quoting—“but my uncle and I had to see a fella—Yes, I’ve met your enchanting daughter at dancing-school.”	He'd walk over to Mrs. St. Claire, not too fast, and say, in just the right tone, "Mrs. St. Claire, I'm really sorry I'm late, but my uh..." He stopped, realizing he was about to lie. "My uncle and I had to meet someone. Oh, and yes, I've met your lovely daughter at dance class."

Then he would shake hands, using that slight, half-foreign bow, with all the starchy little females, and nod to the fellas who would be standing ’round, paralyzed into rigid groups for mutual protection. A butler (one of the three in Minneapolis) swung open the door. Amory stepped inside and divested himself of cap and coat	He'd shake hands, giving a small, almost European-style bow, to all the proper young women, and nod to the guys standing nearby, frozen in awkward groups for support. A butler (one of only three in Minneapolis!) opened the door. Amory went inside and took off his hat and coat.

He was mildly surprised not to hear the shrill squawk of conversation from the next room, and he decided it must be quite formal. He approved of that—as he approved of the butler	He was a little surprised that the next room was quiet, without the loud chatter he expected. He figured it must be a fancy event. He liked that, just like he liked the butler.

“Miss Myra,” he said. To his surprise the butler grinned horribly	"Miss Myra," he said. The butler's creepy grin surprised him.

“Oh, yeah,” he declared, “she’s here.” He was unaware that his failure to be cockney was ruining his standing	"Yeah," he said. "She's here." He didn't realize that not having a Cockney accent was hurting his image.

Amory considered him coldly. “But,” continued the butler, his voice rising unnecessarily, “she’s the only one what is here. The party’s gone	Amory looked at him, unimpressed. "But," the butler went on, raising his voice for no reason, "she's the only person here. Everyone else has left the party."

Amory gasped in sudden horror. “What?” “She’s been waitin’ for Amory Blaine. That’s you, ain’t it? Her mother says that if you showed up by five-thirty you two was to go after ’em in the Packard.” Amory’s despair was crystallized by the appearance of Myra herself, bundled to the ears in a polo coat, her face plainly sulky, her voice pleasant only with difficulty	Amory was shocked. "What?" "She's been waiting for Amory Blaine. That's you, right? Her mom said if you were here by 5:30, you two were supposed to chase after them in the Packard." Amory's dread became real when Myra showed up. She was wrapped up in a big coat, looked obviously annoyed, and forced herself to sound nice.

“ ’Lo, Amory.” “ ’Lo, Myra	"Hey, Amory." "Hey, Myra."

He had described the state of his vitality. “Well—you got here, anyways	He talked about how energetic he felt. "Well, you made it here, at least."

“Well—I’ll tell you. I guess you don’t know about the auto accident,” he romanced. Myra’s eyes opened wide. “Who was it to?” “Well,” he continued desperately, “uncle ’n aunt ’n I	"Okay, so, you probably haven't heard about the car crash," he began, making up the story. Myra looked shocked. "Who was in it?" "Well," he rushed on, sounding nervous, "it was my uncle, aunt, and me."

“Was anyone killed?” Amory paused and then nodded. “Your uncle?”—alarm. “Oh, no just a horse—a sorta gray horse.” At this point the Erse butler snickered	"Did anyone die?" Amory stopped, then nodded. "Your uncle?"—worried. "Oh, no, just a horse—a kind of gray horse." The Irish butler chuckled at this.

“Probably killed the engine,” he suggested. Amory would have put him on the rack without a scruple. “We’ll go now,” said Myra coolly	"He probably stalled the car," he guessed. Amory would have tortured him without hesitation. "Let's go," Myra said calmly.

“You see, Amory, the bobs were ordered for five and everybody was here, so we couldn’t wait—” “Well, I couldn’t help it, could I?” “So mama said for me to wait till ha’past five. We’ll catch the bobs before it gets to the Minnehaha Club, Amory.” Amory’s shredded poise dropped from him. He pictured the happy party jingling along snowy streets, the appearance of the limousine, the horrible public descent of him and Myra before sixty reproachful eyes, his apology—a real one this time	"Look, Amory, the sleigh rides were booked for five people, and everyone was already here, so we couldn't wait." "Well, it wasn't my fault, was it?" "So Mom told me to wait until 5:30. We'll catch up with the sleighs before they get to the Minnehaha Club, Amory." Amory completely lost his cool. He imagined the happy group having fun on the snowy streets, the limo showing up, and him and Myra awkwardly getting out in front of sixty disapproving people, and him having to apologize – and this time, he'd actually mean it.

He sighed aloud. “What?” inquired Myra. “Nothing	He sighed loudly. "What's wrong?" Myra asked. "Nothing."

I was just yawning. Are we going to surely catch up with ’em before they get there?” He was encouraging a faint hope that they might slip into the Minnehaha Club and meet the others there, be found in blasé seclusion before the fire and quite regain his lost attitude. “Oh, sure Mike, we’ll catch ’em all right—let’s hurry	"I was just yawning. You think we'll catch them before they arrive?" He was hoping they could sneak into the Minnehaha Club, meet everyone there, and be found chilling by the fire, regaining his cool. "Oh, yeah, Mike, we'll definitely catch them—let's go!"

He became conscious of his stomach. As they stepped into the machine he hurriedly slapped the paint of diplomacy over a rather boxlike plan he had conceived. It was based upon some “trade-lasts” gleaned at dancing-school, to the effect that he was “awful good-looking and English, sort of.” “Myra,” he said, lowering his voice and choosing his words carefully, “I beg a thousand pardons	He suddenly felt nervous. Getting into the car, he quickly tried to cover up his somewhat clumsy scheme with smooth talk. The scheme was based on some pick-up lines he'd learned at dancing school, like how he was "really good-looking and kind of English." Lowering his voice and choosing his words carefully, he said, "Myra, I'm so sorry."

Can you ever forgive me?” She regarded him gravely, his intent green eyes, his mouth, that to her thirteen-year-old, arrow-collar taste was the quintessence of romance. Yes, Myra could forgive him very easily. “Why—yes—sure.” He looked at her again, and then dropped his eyes	"Can you ever forgive me?" She looked at him seriously, focusing on his sharp green eyes and his mouth. To her, at thirteen, his old-fashioned style was the height of romance. Yes, Myra could forgive him easily. "Yeah, sure, I forgive you." He looked at her again, then looked away.

He had lashes. “I’m awful,” he said sadly. “I’m diff’runt. I don’t know why I make faux pas	He had long eyelashes. "I'm terrible," he said, sounding sad. "I'm different. I don't know why I keep messing things up socially."

’Cause I don’t care, I s’pose.” Then, recklessly: “I been smoking too much. I’ve got t’bacca heart.” Myra pictured an all-night tobacco debauch, with Amory pale and reeling from the effect of nicotined lungs	"I guess I just don't care." Then, impulsively: "I've been smoking too much. I think I have 'tobacco heart.'" Myra imagined Amory staying up all night smoking, looking sick and dizzy from the nicotine.

She gave a little gasp. “Oh, Amory, don’t smoke. You’ll stunt your growth!” “I don’t care,” he persisted gloomily	She gasped softly. "Oh, Amory, please don't smoke. It'll stop you from growing!" "I don't care," he said, sounding down.

“I gotta. I got the habit	I have to. It's a habit now.

I’ve done a lot of things that if my fambly knew”—he hesitated, giving her imagination time to picture dark horrors—“I went to the burlesque show last week.” Myra was quite overcome. He turned the green eyes on her again. “You’re the only girl in town I like much,” he exclaimed in a rush of sentiment	"I've done things my family would freak out about if they knew"—he paused, letting her think of awful stuff—"like, I went to a burlesque show last week." Myra was really shocked. He looked at her again with his green eyes and blurted out, "You're the only girl in this town I really like!"

“You’re simpatico.” Myra was not sure that she was, but it sounded stylish though vaguely improper	"You're on my wavelength." Myra wasn't sure if that was true, but it sounded cool, even if a little inappropriate.

Thick dusk had descended outside, and as the limousine made a sudden turn she was jolted against him; their hands touched. “You shouldn’t smoke, Amory,” she whispered. “Don’t you know that?” He shook his head. “Nobody cares	It was dark outside. The limo turned sharply, and she bumped into him, their hands touching. "You shouldn't smoke, Amory," she whispered. "You know it's bad for you, right?" He shook his head. "Nobody cares."

Myra hesitated. “I care.” Something stirred within Amory	Myra paused. "I care about you." Amory felt something awaken inside him.

“Oh, yes, you do! You got a crush on Froggy Parker. I guess everybody knows that	"Yeah, you totally do! You're crushing on Froggy Parker. I think everyone knows it."

“No, I haven’t,” very slowly. A silence, while Amory thrilled. There was something fascinating about Myra, shut away here cosily from the dim, chill air. Myra, a little bundle of clothes, with strands of yellow hair curling out from under her skating cap	"No," he said, drawing it out. It got quiet, and Amory got excited. Myra was really interesting, tucked away in this warm place away from the cold and dark outside. Myra, just a small person bundled in clothes, with bits of her blonde hair sticking out from under her hat.

“Because I’ve got a crush, too—” He paused, for he heard in the distance the sound of young laughter, and, peering through the frosted glass along the lamp-lit street, he made out the dark outline of the bobbing party. He must act quickly. He reached over with a violent, jerky effort, and clutched Myra’s hand—her thumb, to be exact. “Tell him to go to the Minnehaha straight,” he whispered	"Because I'm also really into someone—" He stopped because he heard young people laughing in the distance. Looking through the blurry glass at the streetlights, he saw the blurry group of people walking. He had to do something fast. He reached out quickly and grabbed Myra's hand—specifically, her thumb. "Tell him to go directly to the Minnehaha," he whispered.

“I wanta talk to you—I got to talk to you.” Myra made out the party ahead, had an instant vision of her mother, and then—alas for convention—glanced into the eyes beside. “Turn down this side street, Richard, and drive straight to the Minnehaha Club!” she cried through the speaking tube	"I need to talk to you, I really need to talk." Myra saw the party up ahead, pictured her mom for a second, and then – forget the rules – she looked Richard in the eye. "Turn down this side street, Richard, and take me straight to the Minnehaha Club!" she yelled into the intercom.

Amory sank back against the cushions with a sigh of relief. “I can kiss her,” he thought	Amory leaned back, relieved. "I can kiss her," he thought.

“I’ll bet I can. I’ll bet I can!” Overhead the sky was half crystalline, half misty, and the night around was chill and vibrant with rich tension. From the Country Club steps the roads stretched away, dark creases on the white blanket; huge heaps of snow lining the sides like the tracks of giant moles	"I'm sure I can! I know I can!" Above, the sky was partly clear and partly foggy, and the night was cold and buzzing with energy. From the Country Club steps, the roads went off into the distance, like dark lines on the white snow. Big piles of snow lined the roads, looking like the trails of giant moles.

They lingered for a moment on the steps, and watched the white holiday moon. “Pale moons like that one”—Amory made a vague gesture—“make people mystérieuse. You look like a young witch with her cap off and her hair sorta mussed”—her hands clutched at her hair—“Oh, leave it, it looks good	They stood on the steps for a bit, looking at the bright, white moon. “Moons like that"—Amory gestured vaguely—"make people mysterious. You look like a young witch who's taken off her hat and messed up her hair"—she grabbed her hair—"Hey, leave it, it looks great."

They drifted up the stairs and Myra led the way into the little den of his dreams, where a cosy fire was burning before a big sink-down couch. A few years later this was to be a great stage for Amory, a cradle for many an emotional crisis. Now they talked for a moment about bobbing parties	They walked upstairs, and Myra led him into his favorite little room. A nice fire was going in front of a comfy couch. Later, this room would be a big deal for Amory, a place where he'd have a lot of emotional drama. Right now, they just chatted about parties.

“There’s always a bunch of shy fellas,” he commented, “sitting at the tail of the bob, sorta lurkin’ an’ whisperin’ an’ pushin’ each other off. Then there’s always some crazy cross-eyed girl”—he gave a terrifying imitation—“she’s always talkin’ hard, sorta, to the chaperon.” “You’re such a funny boy,” puzzled Myra. “How d’y’ mean?” Amory gave immediate attention, on his own ground at last	"There are always shy guys," he said, "hanging back, whispering, and messing with each other. And there's always some wild, kind of strange girl" – he did a funny impression – "she's always talking loudly to the chaperone." "You're so weird," Myra said, confused. "What do you mean?" Amory perked up, finally feeling comfortable.

“Oh—always talking about crazy things. Why don’t you come skiing with Marylyn and I tomorrow?” “I don’t like girls in the daytime,” he said shortly, and then, thinking this a bit abrupt, he added: “But I like you.” He cleared his throat. “I like you first and second and third	"Ugh, you're always talking nonsense. Why don't you come skiing with Marylyn and me tomorrow?" "I don't like girls during the day," he said, cutting her off. Then, realizing he sounded rude, he added, "But I like you." He paused awkwardly. "I really, really like you."

Myra’s eyes became dreamy. What a story this would make to tell Marylyn! Here on the couch with this wonderful-looking boy—the little fire—the sense that they were alone in the great building— Myra capitulated	Myra's eyes glazed over. She thought about how good this story would be to tell Marylyn! Here she was, on the couch with this hot guy—the small fire burning—feeling like they were the only two people in the whole building. Myra gave in.

The atmosphere was too appropriate. “I like you the first twenty-five,” she confessed, her voice trembling, “and Froggy Parker twenty-sixth.” Froggy had fallen twenty-five places in one hour	The mood felt too perfect. "I liked you best for the first twenty-five minutes," she admitted, her voice shaking, "then Froggy Parker was my favorite for the twenty-sixth minute." Froggy had dropped twenty-five spots in her ranking in just one hour.

As yet he had not even noticed it. But Amory, being on the spot, leaned over quickly and kissed Myra’s cheek	He still hadn't seen it happen. But Amory, who was right there, quickly leaned over and kissed Myra's cheek.

He had never kissed a girl before, and he tasted his lips curiously, as if he had munched some new fruit. Then their lips brushed like young wild flowers in the wind. “We’re awful,” rejoiced Myra gently	He'd never kissed anyone before, so he touched his lips, wondering what it was like, as if he'd just tried a new fruit. Then their lips barely touched, like flowers in the breeze. "We're terrible at this," Myra said softly, happily.

She slipped her hand into his, her head drooped against his shoulder. Sudden revulsion seized Amory, disgust, loathing for the whole incident. He desired frantically to be away, never to see Myra again, never to kiss anyone; he became conscious of his face and hers, of their clinging hands, and he wanted to creep out of his body and hide somewhere safe out of sight, up in the corner of his mind. “Kiss me again	She put her hand in his, leaning her head on his shoulder. Amory suddenly felt disgusted and hated everything about what was happening. He desperately wanted to leave, never see Myra again, and never kiss anyone. He became aware of their faces and their hands holding tight, and he wished he could disappear and hide somewhere safe, deep inside his own head. "Kiss me again."

Her voice came out of a great void. “I don’t want to,” he heard himself saying. There was another pause. “I don’t want to!” he repeated passionately	Her voice sounded distant, like it was coming from nowhere. "I don't want to," he heard himself say. He paused. "I don't want to!" he said again, really meaning it.

Myra sprang up, her cheeks pink with bruised vanity, the great bow on the back of her head trembling sympathetically. “I hate you!” she cried	Myra jumped up, her face flushed because her pride was hurt, and the big bow on her head shook. "I hate you!" she yelled.

“Don’t you ever dare to speak to me again!” “What?” stammered Amory. “I’ll tell mama you kissed me! I will too! I will too! I’ll tell mama, and she won’t let me play with you!” Amory rose and stared at her helplessly, as though she were a new animal of whose presence on the earth he had not heretofore been aware. The door opened suddenly, and Myra’s mother appeared on the threshold, fumbling with her lorgnette. “Well,” she began, adjusting it benignantly, “the man at the desk told me you two children were up here—How do you do, Amory	"Don't you ever talk to me again!" "What?" Amory stuttered. "I'm going to tell my mom you kissed me! I will! I'm going to tell her, and she won't let me hang out with you!" Amory stood up and stared at her, confused, like she was some creature he'd never seen before. The door swung open, and Myra's mom showed up, messing with her glasses. "Well," she said, adjusting them kindly, "the guy at the front desk said you two were up here—Hello, Amory."

Amory watched Myra and waited for the crash—but none came. The pout faded, the high pink subsided, and Myra’s voice was placid as a summer lake when she answered her mother. “Oh, we started so late, mama, that I thought we might as well—” He heard from below the shrieks of laughter, and smelled the vapid odor of hot chocolate and teacakes as he silently followed mother and daughter downstairs. The sound of the graphophone mingled with the voices of many girls humming the air, and a faint glow was born and spread over him: “Casey-Jones—mounted to the cab-un Casey-Jones—’th his orders in his hand	Amory watched Myra, expecting her to explode, but she didn't. Her pout disappeared, her face calmed down, and she answered her mother calmly. "Oh, Mom, we left so late that I thought we might as well—" Downstairs, he heard shrieks of laughter and smelled the bland scent of hot chocolate and teacakes as he quietly followed Myra and her mother. The music from the record player mixed with the voices of many girls humming along, and a warm feeling grew inside him: "Casey Jones—climbed into the driver's seat—Casey Jones—with his orders in his hand."

Casey-Jones—mounted to the cab-un Took his farewell journey to the promised land.”	Casey Jones, the train driver, climbed into the engine. He was starting his last ride to heaven.

Amory spent nearly two years in Minneapolis. The first winter he wore moccasins that were born yellow, but after many applications of oil and dirt assumed their mature color, a dirty, greenish brown; he wore a gray plaid mackinaw coat, and a red toboggan cap. His dog, Count Del Monte, ate the red cap, so his uncle gave him a gray one that pulled down over his face. The trouble with this one was that you breathed into it and your breath froze; one day the darn thing froze his cheek	Amory lived in Minneapolis for almost two years. The first winter, he had bright yellow moccasins. They got darker and dirtier, turning a gross greenish-brown color after he wore them a lot. He also wore a gray plaid coat and a red knit cap. His dog, Count Del Monte, ate the red cap, so his uncle gave him a gray one that covered his face. The problem with the gray cap was that his breath would freeze inside it. One time, it even froze to his cheek.

He rubbed snow on his cheek, but it turned bluish-black just the same. The Count Del Monte ate a box of bluing once, but it didn’t hurt him. Later, however, he lost his mind and ran madly up the street, bumping into fences, rolling in gutters, and pursuing his eccentric course out of Amory’s life	He rubbed snow on his cheek, but it still looked bluish-black. Count Del Monte once ate a whole box of laundry bluing, but it didn't affect him physically. Later, though, he went crazy and ran wild through the streets, crashing into fences, falling in the gutters, and basically disappearing from Amory's life for good.

Amory cried on his bed. “Poor little Count,” he cried	Amory lay on his bed crying. "Poor little Count," he sobbed.

“Oh, poor little Count!” After several months he suspected Count of a fine piece of emotional acting. Amory and Frog Parker considered that the greatest line in literature occurred in Act III of Arsène Lupin	"Poor little Count!" After a while, Amory started to think the Count was just faking his emotions. He and Frog Parker thought the best line ever written was in the third act of Arsène Lupin.

They sat in the first row at the Wednesday and Saturday matinees. The line was: “If one can’t be a great artist or a great soldier, the next best thing is to be a great criminal.” Amory fell in love again, and wrote a poem	They always sat up front at the Wednesday and Saturday afternoon movies. The saying was: "If you can't be a top artist or a war hero, being a major criminal is the coolest alternative." Amory fell in love all over again and wrote a poem.

This was it: “Marylyn and Sallee, Those are the girls for me. Marylyn stands above Sallee in that sweet, deep love.” He was interested in whether McGovern of Minnesota would make the first or second All-American, how to do the card-pass, how to do the coin-pass, chameleon ties, how babies were born, and whether Three-fingered Brown was really a better pitcher than Christie Mathewson. Among other things he read: For the Honor of the School, Little Women (twice), The Common Law, Sapho, Dangerous Dan McGrew, The Broad Highway (three times), The Fall of the House of Usher, Three Weeks, Mary Ware, the Little Colonel’s Chum, Gunga Din, The Police Gazette, and Jim-Jam Jems	He was all about: "Marylyn and Sallee, those are the girls for me. Marylyn's love is deeper and sweeter than Sallee's." He wondered if McGovern from Minnesota would be a top football player, how to do cool card and coin tricks, what ties changed color, how babies were born, and if Three-fingered Brown was a better pitcher than Christie Mathewson. He read stuff like: For the Honor of the School, Little Women (twice), The Common Law, Sapho, Dangerous Dan McGrew, The Broad Highway (three times), The Fall of the House of Usher, Three Weeks, Mary Ware, the Little Colonel’s Chum, Gunga Din, The Police Gazette, and Jim-Jam Jems.

He had all the Henty biases in history, and was particularly fond of the cheerful murder stories of Mary Roberts Rinehart. School ruined his French and gave him a distaste for standard authors. His masters considered him idle, unreliable and superficially clever	He believed the usual stuff about history. He especially liked Mary Roberts Rinehart's mysteries where people get killed in a fun way. School messed up his French and made him dislike the famous writers everyone reads. His teachers thought he was lazy, couldn't be trusted, and only seemed smart on the surface.

He collected locks of hair from many girls. He wore the rings of several. Finally he could borrow no more rings, owing to his nervous habit of chewing them out of shape. This, it seemed, usually aroused the jealous suspicions of the next borrower	He got locks of hair from a lot of girls. He wore a bunch of their rings. Eventually, he couldn't borrow any more rings because he nervously chewed them out of shape. This, apparently, made the next girl he tried to borrow from suspicious and jealous.

All through the summer months Amory and Frog Parker went each week to the Stock Company. Afterward they would stroll home in the balmy air of August night, dreaming along Hennepin and Nicollet Avenues, through the gay crowd. Amory wondered how people could fail to notice that he was a boy marked for glory, and when faces of the throng turned toward him and ambiguous eyes stared into his, he assumed the most romantic of expressions and walked on the air cushions that lie on the asphalts of fourteen	All summer, Amory and Frog Parker went to the theater every week. Afterward, they'd walk home through the warm August night, lost in thought as they strolled along Hennepin and Nicollet Avenues, surrounded by the lively crowd. Amory couldn't understand why people didn't see that he was destined for greatness. When people looked at him, their eyes questioning, he'd put on his most dramatic face and float along the sidewalks like he was walking on air.

Always, after he was in bed, there were voices—indefinite, fading, enchanting—just outside his window, and before he fell asleep he would dream one of his favorite waking dreams, the one about becoming a great halfback, or the one about the Japanese invasion, when he was rewarded by being made the youngest general in the world. It was always the becoming he dreamed of, never the being	Every night, after he got into bed, he'd hear voices outside his window. They were unclear, getting quieter, and kind of magical. Before he fell asleep, he'd always have a favorite daydream: either becoming a famous football player, or the one where Japan invaded, and he was made the youngest general ever as a reward. He always dreamed about the *process* of becoming something, never about actually *being* it.

This, too, was quite characteristic of Amory.	That was totally like Amory.

Before he was summoned back to Lake Geneva, he had appeared, shy but inwardly glowing, in his first long trousers, set off by a purple accordion tie and a “Belmont” collar with the edges unassailably meeting, purple socks, and handkerchief with a purple border peeping from his breast pocket. But more than that, he had formulated his first philosophy, a code to live by, which, as near as it can be named, was a sort of aristocratic egotism	Before he had to go back to Lake Geneva, he showed up, looking shy but secretly thrilled, in his first grown-up pants. He was wearing a purple tie that looked like an accordion, a "Belmont" collar that was perfectly buttoned, purple socks, and a handkerchief with a purple edge sticking out of his chest pocket. More importantly, he'd come up with his first personal philosophy, a way to live his life, which you could call a kind of fancy selfishness.

He had realized that his best interests were bound up with those of a certain variant, changing person, whose label, in order that his past might always be identified with him, was Amory Blaine. Amory marked himself a fortunate youth, capable of infinite expansion for good or evil. He did not consider himself a “strong char’c’ter,” but relied on his facility (learn things sorta quick) and his superior mentality (read a lotta deep books). He was proud of the fact that he could never become a mechanical or scientific genius	He understood that his own well-being was connected to this evolving, different version of himself, who would always be known as Amory Blaine. Amory saw himself as lucky and believed he could become either incredibly good or incredibly bad. He didn't think he was a "strong person" but depended on being quick to learn and his smarts (from reading a lot of serious books). He was proud that he could never be a mechanical or scientific expert.

From no other heights was he debarred. Physically.—Amory thought that he was exceedingly handsome. He was	Nothing was off-limits for him. Physically, Amory thought he was really good-looking. He was.

He fancied himself an athlete of possibilities and a supple dancer. Socially.—Here his condition was, perhaps, most dangerous. He granted himself personality, charm, magnetism, poise, the power of dominating all contemporary males, the gift of fascinating all women	He thought of himself as someone who could do anything, like a graceful dancer. Socially, he was in the most trouble. He believed he had a great personality, charm, charisma, and composure. He thought he could easily impress other guys and completely captivate any woman.

Mentally.—Complete, unquestioned superiority	In his head: he was totally, undeniably better than everyone else.

Now a confession will have to be made. Amory had rather a Puritan conscience. Not that he yielded to it—later in life he almost completely slew it—but at fifteen it made him consider himself a great deal worse than other boys. unscrupulousness	Okay, I gotta admit something. Amory had a pretty strong conscience, like a Puritan. It wasn't that he always listened to it – he pretty much killed it off later on – but when he was fifteen, it made him think he was way more messed up than other guys.

the desire to influence people in almost every way, even for evil. a certain coldness and lack of affection, amounting sometimes to cruelty. a shifting sense of honor. an unholy selfishness	Wanting to control everyone, even to do bad things. Being kind of distant and not caring, sometimes even being mean. Having a flexible idea of what's right and wrong. Being really selfish.

a puzzled, furtive interest in everything concerning sex. There was, also, a curious strain of weakness running crosswise through his makeup. a harsh phrase from the lips of an older boy (older boys usually detested him) was liable to sweep him off his poise into surly sensitiveness, or timid stupidity. he was a slave to his own moods and he felt that though he was capable of recklessness and audacity, he possessed neither courage, perseverance, nor self-respect	He was weirdly and secretly interested in anything about sex. He also had a strange, underlying flaw. If an older boy said something mean (and older boys usually hated him), it would easily throw him off balance, making him either sulky and touchy or just dumb and scared. He was controlled by his emotions, and he thought that even though he could be wild and bold, he didn't have real bravery, stick-to-it-iveness, or any respect for himself.

Vanity, tempered with self-suspicion if not self-knowledge, a sense of people as automatons to his will, a desire to “pass” as many boys as possible and get to a vague top of the world. with this background did Amory drift into adolescence.	Amory went into his teens with a mix of arrogance and self-doubt. He saw people as puppets he could control, and he wanted to impress a lot of guys while aiming for some undefined success.

The train slowed up with midsummer languor at Lake Geneva, and Amory caught sight of his mother waiting in her electric on the gravelled station drive. It was an ancient electric, one of the early types, and painted gray. The sight of her sitting there, slenderly erect, and of her face, where beauty and dignity combined, melting to a dreamy recollected smile, filled him with a sudden great pride of her	The train slowed down lazily at Lake Geneva in the middle of summer. Amory saw his mother waiting in her electric car by the station's gravel driveway. It was an old electric car, one of the first models, and it was painted gray. Seeing her sitting there, so straight and slim, and her beautiful, dignified face softening into a dreamy, remembering smile, made him feel incredibly proud of her.

As they kissed coolly and he stepped into the electric, he felt a quick fear lest he had lost the requisite charm to measure up to her. “Dear boy—you’re so tall. look behind and see if there’s anything coming	They kissed quickly, almost casually, and as he got on the train, he suddenly worried he wasn't good enough for her anymore. "You're so tall," she said. "Check if anyone's coming."

She looked left and right, she slipped cautiously into a speed of two miles an hour, beseeching Amory to act as sentinel; and at one busy crossing she made him get out and run ahead to signal her forward like a traffic policeman. Beatrice was what might be termed a careful driver. “You are tall—but you’re still very handsome—you’ve skipped the awkward age, or is that sixteen; perhaps it’s fourteen or fifteen; I can never remember; but you’ve skipped it	She checked both ways, then slowly pulled into traffic, going about two miles an hour. She asked Amory to watch out for her. At a busy intersection, she even made him get out and wave her forward like a cop directing traffic. Beatrice was definitely a cautious driver. "You're tall and still good-looking. You missed that awkward stage – was that at sixteen? Or maybe fourteen or fifteen? I always forget! But you totally skipped it."

“Don’t embarrass me,” murmured Amory. “But, my dear boy, what odd clothes! They look as if they were a set—don’t they? Is your underwear purple, too?” Amory grunted impolitely. “You must go to Brooks’ and get some really nice suits	"Don't make me look bad," Amory mumbled. "But seriously, those clothes are weird! They look like they're a matching outfit, right? Is your underwear purple, too?" Amory made a rude noise. "You need to go to Brooks Brothers and get some good suits."

Oh, we’ll have a talk tonight or perhaps tomorrow night. I want to tell you about your heart—you’ve probably been neglecting your heart—and you don’t know	We should talk tonight, or maybe tomorrow. I need to tell you about your feelings. You're probably not taking care of them, and you don't even realize it.

Amory thought how superficial was the recent overlay of his own generation. Aside from a minute shyness, he felt that the old cynical kinship with his mother had not been one bit broken. Yet for the first few days he wandered about the gardens and along the shore in a state of superloneliness, finding a lethargic content in smoking “Bull” at the garage with one of the chauffeurs	Amory realized how shallow his generation really was. He still felt that old, cynical connection with his mother, like nothing had changed, except maybe he was a little more shy now. But for the first few days, he felt incredibly lonely, wandering around the gardens and the beach. He found a lazy kind of peace smoking tobacco at the garage with one of the drivers.

The sixty acres of the estate were dotted with old and new summer houses and many fountains and white benches that came suddenly into sight from foliage-hung hiding-places; there was a great and constantly increasing family of white cats that prowled the many flowerbeds and were silhouetted suddenly at night against the darkening trees. It was on one of the shadowy paths that Beatrice at last captured Amory, after Mr. Blaine had, as usual, retired for the evening to his private library	The large property, with its sixty acres, had a mix of old and new cottages, lots of fountains, and white benches hidden among the plants. Many white cats lived there, always growing in number, wandering through the flower gardens and appearing against the trees as it got dark. Beatrice finally caught up with Amory on one of the dark paths after Mr. Blaine had gone to his study for the night, like he always did.

After reproving him for avoiding her, she took him for a long tête-à-tête in the moonlight. He could not reconcile himself to her beauty, that was mother to his own, the exquisite neck and shoulders, the grace of a fortunate woman of thirty	After scolding him for ignoring her, she had a long, private talk with him in the moonlight. He still couldn't get used to how beautiful she was - a beauty so similar to his own. He was struck by her perfect neck and shoulders, and the elegance of a woman who had it all at thirty.

“Amory, dear,” she crooned softly, “I had such a strange, weird time after I left you.” “Did you, Beatrice?” “When I had my last breakdown”—she spoke of it as a sturdy, gallant feat	"Amory, honey," she said gently, "I had a really strange, messed-up time after I left you." "Really, Beatrice?" "After my last nervous breakdown"—she talked about it like it was some kind of brave accomplishment.

“The doctors told me”—her voice sang on a confidential note—“that if any man alive had done the consistent drinking that I have, he would have been physically shattered, my dear, and in his grave—long in his grave.” Amory winced, and wondered how this would have sounded to Froggy Parker	"The doctors told me," she said, lowering her voice like it was a secret, "that if any other guy drank as much as I do, he'd be totally wrecked and dead—buried a long time ago." Amory cringed, wondering what Froggy Parker would think if he heard that.

“Yes,” continued Beatrice tragically, “I had dreams—wonderful visions.” She pressed the palms of her hands into her eyes. “I saw bronze rivers lapping marble shores, and great birds that soared through the air, parti-colored birds with iridescent plumage	"Yeah," Beatrice went on, sounding sad, "I used to have dreams—amazing images." She covered her eyes with her hands. "I imagined shiny rivers washing up on marble beaches, and huge, colorful birds flying in the sky, birds with feathers that shimmered."

I heard strange music and the flare of barbaric trumpets—what?” Amory had snickered. “What, Amory?” “I said go on, Beatrice.” “That was all—it merely recurred and recurred—gardens that flaunted coloring against which this would be quite dull, moons that whirled and swayed, paler than winter moons, more golden than harvest moons—” “Are you quite well now, Beatrice?” “Quite well—as well as I will ever be. I am not understood, Amory	I heard weird music and loud, wild trumpets. What?" Amory chuckled. "What is it, Amory?" "I just said keep going, Beatrice." "That's it—it just kept happening over and over. Gardens with super bright colors that would make this seem boring. Moons spinning and moving, paler than winter moons, but more gold than harvest moons." "Are you feeling okay now, Beatrice?" "I'm fine, as good as I'll ever be. Nobody gets me, Amory."

I know that can’t express it to you, Amory, but—I am not understood.” Amory was quite moved. He put his arm around his mother, rubbing his head gently against her shoulder	"I know I can't explain it to you, Amory, but… nobody gets me." Amory felt sympathy. He hugged his mother, gently nuzzling her shoulder.

“Poor Beatrice—poor Beatrice.” “Tell me about you, Amory	"Poor Beatrice, poor Beatrice." "Now, tell me about yourself, Amory."

Did you have two horrible years?” Amory considered lying, and then decided against it. “No, Beatrice. I enjoyed them. I adapted myself to the bourgeoisie	"Did you have a terrible couple of years?" Amory thought about lying, but changed his mind. "No, Beatrice. I liked them. I fit in with regular people."

I became conventional.” He surprised himself by saying that, and he pictured how Froggy would have gaped. “Beatrice,” he said suddenly, “I want to go away to school	"I've become normal," he said, surprised. He imagined how shocked Froggy would be. Then he blurted out, "Beatrice, I want to go away to college."

Everybody in Minneapolis is going to go away to school.” Beatrice showed some alarm. “But you’re only fifteen.” “Yes, but everybody goes away to school at fifteen, and I want to, Beatrice	Everyone in Minneapolis leaves for college. Beatrice seemed worried. "But you're only fifteen." "Yeah, but everyone goes to college at fifteen, and I want to too, Beatrice."

On Beatrice’s suggestion the subject was dropped for the rest of the walk, but a week later she delighted him by saying: “Amory, I have decided to let you have your way. If you still want to, you can go to school	Beatrice suggested they stop talking about it for the rest of their walk. But a week later, she made Amory happy by saying, "Amory, I've changed my mind. You can go to school if you still want to."

“Yes?” “To St. Regis’s in Connecticut.” Amory felt a quick excitement	"Yeah?" "To the St. Regis boarding school in Connecticut." Amory got a sudden thrill.

“It’s being arranged,” continued Beatrice. “It’s better that you should go away	"It's being taken care of," Beatrice went on. "It's best if you leave."

I’d have preferred you to have gone to Eton, and then to Christ Church, Oxford, but it seems impracticable now—and for the present we’ll let the university question take care of itself.” “What are you going to do, Beatrice?” “Heaven knows. It seems my fate to fret away my years in this country. Not for a second do I regret being American—indeed, I think that a regret typical of very vulgar people, and I feel sure we are the great coming nation—yet”—and she sighed—“I feel my life should have drowsed away close to an older, mellower civilization, a land of greens and autumnal browns—” Amory did not answer, so his mother continued: “My regret is that you haven’t been abroad, but still, as you are a man, it’s better that you should grow up here under the snarling eagle—is that the right term?” Amory agreed that it was	"I wish you could have gone to Eton and then Oxford, but that's not happening now. We can figure out college later." "What are you going to do, Beatrice?" "God knows. I guess I'm stuck wasting my life in America. I don't regret being American for a second - I think only uncultured people do. We're the next big thing. But," she sighed, "I feel like I should have lived in an older, gentler place, a land of green fields and autumn colors." Amory didn't say anything, so his mother went on, "I'm sad you haven't been to Europe, but it's better for a man to grow up here, under the American eagle – is that the right way to put it?" Amory said it was.

She would not have appreciated the Japanese invasion. “When do I go to school?” “Next month. You’ll have to start East a little early to take your examinations. After that you’ll have a free week, so I want you to go up the Hudson and pay a visit	She wouldn't have liked the Japanese invasion. "When do I start school?" "Next month. You'll need to head back East a bit early for your exams. Afterward, you'll have a week off, so I want you to visit up near the Hudson River."

“To who?” “To Monsignor Darcy, Amory. He wants to see you	"To whom?" "To Monsignor Darcy, Amory. He wants to talk to you."

He went to Harrow and then to Yale—became a Catholic. I want him to talk to you—I feel he can be such a help—” She stroked his auburn hair gently. “Dear Amory, dear Amory—” “Dear Beatrice—” So early in September Amory, provided with “six suits summer underwear, six suits winter underwear, one sweater or T shirt, one jersey, one overcoat, winter” set out for New England, the land of schools.	He went to a fancy boarding school and then Yale, and became Catholic. I want you to talk to him. I think he can really help you." She gently stroked his red-brown hair. "Dear Amory, dear Amory..." "Dear Beatrice..." So, early in September, Amory, with "six summer underwears, six winter underwears, a sweater or t-shirt, a jersey, and a winter overcoat" headed to New England, the place of schools.

There were Andover and Exeter with their memories of New England dead—large, college-like democracies; St. Mark’s, Groton, St. Regis’—recruited from Boston and the Knickerbocker families of New York; St. Paul’s, with its great rinks; Pomfret and St. George’s, prosperous and well-dressed;	He knew about fancy prep schools like Andover and Exeter, which had a lot of history and felt like small colleges. Then there were schools like St. Mark's, Groton, and St. Regis', which got their students from rich Boston families and old New York families. St. Paul's was famous for its ice rinks, and Pomfret and St. George's were known for being wealthy and having students who dressed well.

Taft and Hotchkiss, which prepared the wealth of the Middle West for social success at Yale; Pawling, Westminster, Choate, Kent, and a hundred others; all milling out their well-set-up, conventional, impressive type, year after year; their mental stimulus the college entrance exams; their vague purpose set forth in a hundred circulars as “To impart a Thorough Mental, Moral, and Physical Training as a Christian Gentleman, to fit the boy for meeting the problems of his day and generation, and to give a solid foundation in the Arts and Sciences.” At St. Regis’ Amory stayed three days and took his exams with a scoffing confidence, then doubling back to New York to pay his tutelary visit	Taft and Hotchkiss, schools that got rich Midwestern kids ready to be popular at Yale; plus Pawling, Westminster, Choate, Kent, and tons of others – all churning out the same kind of polished, predictable, impressive guys every year. Their main focus was just passing college entrance exams. Their goal, according to their brochures, was something like: "To give boys a complete education – mind, morals, body – so they'll be good Christians, deal with modern problems, and have a good basic understanding of arts and sciences." Amory spent three days at St. Regis', took his exams with a confident, mocking attitude, then went back to New York for his required visit.

The metropolis, barely glimpsed, made little impression on him, except for the sense of cleanliness he drew from the tall white buildings seen from a Hudson River steamboat in the early morning. Indeed, his mind was so crowded with dreams of athletic prowess at school that he considered this visit only as a rather tiresome prelude to the great adventure. This, however, it did not prove to be	He didn't really notice the city, except that the tall, white buildings looked clean from the boat on the river early in the morning. He was too busy dreaming about sports at school to care about the trip, thinking of it as just a boring wait before the fun started. But actually, it wasn't.

Monsignor Darcy’s house was an ancient, rambling structure set on a hill overlooking the river, and there lived its owner, between his trips to all parts of the Roman-Catholic world, rather like an exiled Stuart king waiting to be called to the rule of his land. Monsignor was forty-four then, and bustling—a trifle too stout for symmetry, with hair the color of spun gold, and a brilliant, enveloping personality. When he came into a room clad in his full purple regalia from thatch to toe, he resembled a Turner sunset, and attracted both admiration and attention. He had written two novels: one of them violently anti-Catholic, just before his conversion, and five years later another, in which he had attempted to turn all his clever jibes against Catholics into even cleverer innuendoes against Episcopalians	Monsignor Darcy lived in a big, old house on a hill with a view of the river. He traveled a lot for the Catholic Church but always came back, kind of like a king in exile waiting to return to power. He was forty-four, energetic, and a little overweight. He had bright blond hair and a really captivating personality. When he entered a room wearing his purple robes, he looked like a colorful sunset and everyone noticed him. He had written two novels. One was strongly against the Catholic Church, written right before he became Catholic. Five years later, he wrote another where he tried to change his previous jokes about Catholics into even smarter insults against Episcopalians.

He was intensely ritualistic, startlingly dramatic, loved the idea of God enough to be a celibate, and rather liked his neighbor. Children adored him because he was like a child; youth revelled in his company because he was still a youth, and couldn’t be shocked. In the proper land and century he might have been a Richelieu—at present he was a very moral, very religious (if not particularly pious) clergyman, making a great mystery about pulling rusty wires, and appreciating life to the fullest, if not entirely enjoying it. He and Amory took to each other at first sight—the jovial, impressive prelate who could dazzle an embassy ball, and the green-eyed, intent youth, in his first long trousers, accepted in their own minds a relation of father and son within a half-hour’s conversation	He was really into routines, super theatrical, and obsessed with God to the point where he stayed single. He actually liked the people around him. Kids loved him because he acted like a kid himself. Young people hung out with him because he was still young at heart and didn't get easily offended. If he'd lived in the right place and time, he could have been a powerful leader. But now, he was just a very moral, religious (but not overly religious) priest who made a big deal out of fixing things and lived life to the fullest, even if he didn't always have fun. He and Amory clicked instantly. The cheerful, impressive priest who could charm anyone, and the young guy with the green eyes, wearing his first grown-up pants, basically became father and son after talking for just a little while.

“My dear boy, I’ve been waiting to see you for years. Take a big chair and we’ll have a chat	"Hey kid, I've been wanting to talk to you for ages. Grab a chair, let's talk."

“I’ve just come from school—St. Regis’s, you know.” “So your mother says—a remarkable woman; have a cigarette—I’m sure you smoke	"I just got out of school - St. Regis's, you know." "That's what your mom said. She's great! Here, have a cigarette - I bet you smoke."

Well, if you’re like me, you loathe all science and mathematics—” Amory nodded vehemently. “Hate ’em all	Okay, if you're like me, you really hate science and math." Amory nodded hard, "I hate them all."

Like English and history.” “Of course. You’ll hate school for a while, too, but I’m glad you’re going to St. Regis’s.” “Why?” “Because it’s a gentleman’s school, and democracy won’t hit you so early. You’ll find plenty of that in college	"Like English and history." "Yeah, definitely. You'll probably hate school for a bit, but I'm happy you're going to St. Regis's." "Why?" "Because it's a school for rich kids, so you won't have to deal with real-world stuff too soon. You'll get plenty of that in college."

“I want to go to Princeton,” said Amory. “I don’t know why, but I think of all Harvard men as sissies, like I used to be, and all Yale men as wearing big blue sweaters and smoking pipes	"I want to go to Princeton," Amory said. "I'm not sure why, but I think Harvard guys are soft, like I used to be. And Yale guys? They're all about big sweaters and pipes."

Monsignor chuckled. “I’m one, you know.” “Oh, you’re different—I think of Princeton as being lazy and good-looking and aristocratic—you know, like a spring day	The priest laughed. "You know I went there, right?" "Oh, you're different. I see Princeton as being full of rich, attractive, and laid-back people – like a nice spring day, you know?"

Harvard seems sort of indoors—” “And Yale is November, crisp and energetic,” finished Monsignor. “That’s it	"Harvard feels kind of closed off." "And Yale is like November, fresh and full of energy," the Monsignor added, "Exactly!"

They slipped briskly into an intimacy from which they never recovered. “I was for Bonnie Prince Charlie,” announced Amory. “Of course you were—and for Hannibal—” “Yes, and for the Southern Confederacy.” He was rather sceptical about being an Irish patriot—he suspected that being Irish was being somewhat common—but Monsignor assured him that Ireland was a romantic lost cause and Irish people quite charming, and that it should, by all means, be one of his principal biases	They quickly became very close, and it changed them forever. Amory said, "I would have supported Bonnie Prince Charlie." "Of course you would," she replied, "and Hannibal too." "Yeah, and the South in the Civil War." He wasn't sure about being an Irish patriot—he thought it might be a bit low-class—but Monsignor told him Ireland was a romantic underdog, Irish people were really likeable, and that he should definitely be passionate about it.

After a crowded hour which included several more cigarettes, and during which Monsignor learned, to his surprise but not to his horror, that Amory had not been brought up a Catholic, he announced that he had another guest. This turned out to be the Honorable Thornton Hancock, of Boston, ex-minister to The Hague, author of an erudite history of the Middle Ages and the last of a distinguished, patriotic, and brilliant family. “He comes here for a rest,” said Monsignor confidentially, treating Amory as a contemporary	After a busy hour of chatting and smoking, the Monsignor was surprised to learn Amory wasn't raised Catholic, but he wasn't too upset. Then, the Monsignor announced another guest was coming. It was Thornton Hancock, from Boston, a former ambassador to The Hague, who wrote a smart book about the Middle Ages and was the last of a respected, patriotic, and smart family. "He's here to relax," the Monsignor said quietly, talking to Amory like they were equals.

“I act as an escape from the weariness of agnosticism, and I think I’m the only man who knows how his staid old mind is really at sea and longs for a sturdy spar like the Church to cling to.” Their first luncheon was one of the memorable events of Amory’s early life. He was quite radiant and gave off a peculiar brightness and charm. Monsignor called out the best that he had thought by question and suggestion, and Amory talked with an ingenious brilliance of a thousand impulses and desires and repulsions and faiths and fears	"I help him forget how tiring it is to not believe in anything. I think I'm the only one who sees that deep down, his serious, traditional mind is lost and just wants something solid, like the Church, to hold onto." That first lunch was a moment Amory would always remember. He was glowing, really bright and charming. The Monsignor got him to share his best thoughts by asking questions and making suggestions, and Amory talked with amazing intelligence about all the things he felt: what he wanted, what he hated, what he believed in, and what scared him.

He and Monsignor held the floor, and the older man, with his less receptive, less accepting, yet certainly not colder mentality, seemed content to listen and bask in the mellow sunshine that played between these two. Monsignor gave the effect of sunlight to many people; Amory gave it in his youth and, to some extent, when he was very much older, but never again was it quite so mutually spontaneous. “He’s a radiant boy,” thought Thornton Hancock, who had seen the splendor of two continents and talked with Parnell and Gladstone and Bismarck—and afterward he added to Monsignor: “But his education ought not to be entrusted to a school or college.” But for the next four years the best of Amory’s intellect was concentrated on matters of popularity, the intricacies of a university social system and American Society as represented by Biltmore Teas and Hot Springs golf-links	He and the Monsignor dominated the conversation. The Monsignor, though not as open-minded or agreeable, but still kind, seemed happy to listen and enjoy the easy connection between them. The Monsignor brought a feeling of warmth to many. Amory used to as a young man, and still did somewhat when he was older, but it was never again so naturally shared. "He's a bright kid," thought Thornton Hancock, who had witnessed great things in Europe and America, and met famous leaders. Afterwards, he told the Monsignor: "But he shouldn't go to a regular school or college." However, for the next four years, Amory focused on being popular, navigating the complicated social scene of college, and the American upper class, like fancy tea parties and golf trips.

In all, a wonderful week, that saw Amory’s mind turned inside out, a hundred of his theories confirmed, and his joy of life crystallized to a thousand ambitions. Not that the conversation was scholastic—heaven forbid! Amory had only the vaguest idea as to what Bernard Shaw was—but Monsignor made quite as much out of The Beloved Vagabond and Sir Nigel, taking good care that Amory never once felt out of his depth	Overall, it was an amazing week. Amory’s thinking was completely changed. Many of his ideas were proven right, and his excitement for life turned into tons of goals. The conversations weren't academic or boring - definitely not! Amory barely knew who Bernard Shaw was. But the Monsignor got a lot out of books like "The Beloved Vagabond" and "Sir Nigel," making sure Amory always understood what they were talking about.

But the trumpets were sounding for Amory’s preliminary skirmish with his own generation. “You’re not sorry to go, of course. With people like us our home is where we are not,” said Monsignor. “I am sorry—” “No, you’re not	The start of Amory's fight with his peers was beginning. "Of course, you're not sad to leave. For people like us, we're at home anywhere we aren't," said the Monsignor. "I am sorry—" "No, you're not."

No one person in the world is necessary to you or to me.” “Well—” “Goodbye.”	"Nobody in the world is essential to either of us." "Okay, but—" "Goodbye."

Amory’s two years at St. Regis’, though in turn painful and triumphant, had as little real significance in his own life as the American “prep” school, crushed as it is under the heel of the universities, has to American life in general. We have no Eton to create the self-consciousness of a governing class; we have, instead, clean, flaccid and innocuous preparatory schools	Amory's time at St. Regis, with its ups and downs, didn't really matter much to him. It's like how American prep schools don't have a huge impact on American society because they're controlled by universities. We don't have a fancy school like Eton that makes rich kids think they're born to rule. Instead, our prep schools are harmless and kind of weak.

He went all wrong at the start, was generally considered both conceited and arrogant, and universally detested. He played football intensely, alternating a reckless brilliancy with a tendency to keep himself as safe from hazard as decency would permit	He messed up from the beginning. People thought he was stuck-up and a jerk, and pretty much everyone hated him. He played football hard, sometimes doing amazing things, but other times trying to avoid getting hurt as much as he could without looking bad.

In a wild panic he backed out of a fight with a boy his own size, to a chorus of scorn, and a week later, in desperation, picked a battle with another boy very much bigger, from which he emerged badly beaten, but rather proud of himself. He was resentful against all those in authority over him, and this, combined with a lazy indifference toward his work, exasperated every master in school	He chickened out of a fight with a kid his own age, and everyone made fun of him. A week later, feeling desperate, he picked a fight with a much bigger kid. He got beat up, but he was kind of proud of himself anyway. He hated anyone in charge, and because he didn't care about schoolwork, all his teachers were annoyed with him.

He grew discouraged and imagined himself a pariah; took to sulking in corners and reading after lights. With a dread of being alone he attached a few friends, but since they were not among the elite of the school, he used them simply as mirrors of himself, audiences before which he might do that posing absolutely essential to him. He was unbearably lonely, desperately unhappy. There were some few grains of comfort	He got bummed out and felt like an outcast. He started moping around and reading in secret after bedtime. He hated being alone, so he latched onto some friends, but since they weren't the popular kids, he just used them to reflect his own image. They were an audience for him to show off in front of, something he really needed. He was incredibly lonely and super unhappy. There were a few small things that made him feel a bit better.

Whenever Amory was submerged, his vanity was the last part to go below the surface, so he could still enjoy a comfortable glow when “Wookey-wookey,” the deaf old housekeeper, told him that he was the best-looking boy she had ever seen. It had pleased him to be the lightest and youngest man on the first football squad; it pleased him when Doctor Dougall told him at the end of a heated conference that he could, if he wished, get the best marks in school. But Doctor Dougall was wrong	Even when Amory felt down, he never lost his pride. He could still feel good about himself when "Wookey-wookey," the old, deaf housekeeper, told him he was the most handsome boy she'd ever seen. He liked being the youngest and lightest guy on the football team. He also liked it when Doctor Dougall told him that he could get the best grades in school if he wanted to. But Doctor Dougall was wrong.

It was temperamentally impossible for Amory to get the best marks in school. Miserable, confined to bounds, unpopular with both faculty and students—that was Amory’s first term. But at Christmas he had returned to Minneapolis, tightlipped and strangely jubilant. “Oh, I was sort of fresh at first,” he told Frog Parker patronizingly, “but I got along fine—lightest man on the squad	Amory just wasn't the type to ace school. He was unhappy, stuck on campus, and no one liked him, teachers or students—that was his first semester. But he came back to Minneapolis for Christmas, quiet but weirdly happy. "Yeah, I was kind of a jerk at first," he told Frog Parker, acting superior, "but I did okay—smallest guy on the team."

You ought to go away to school, Froggy. It’s great stuff.”	"Froggy, you should go to college. It's awesome."

On the last night of his first term, Mr. Margotson, the senior master, sent word to study hall that Amory was to come to his room at nine. Amory suspected that advice was forthcoming, but he determined to be courteous, because this Mr. Margotson had been kindly disposed toward him	On the last night of his first semester, Mr. Margotson, the head teacher, told Amory to come to his office at nine. Amory figured he was going to get some advice, but he decided to be polite since Mr. Margotson had always been nice to him.

His summoner received him gravely, and motioned him to a chair. He hemmed several times and looked consciously kind, as a man will when he knows he’s on delicate ground. “Amory,” he began	The person who called him in greeted him seriously and pointed to a chair. He cleared his throat a few times and looked like he was trying to be nice, like people do when they know they're about to talk about something difficult. "Amory," he started.

“I’ve sent for you on a personal matter.” “Yes, sir	"I asked you here because it's a personal issue." "Yes, sir."

“I’ve noticed you this year and I—I like you. I think you have in you the makings of a—a very good man.” “Yes, sir,” Amory managed to articulate. He hated having people talk as if he were an admitted failure	"I've been watching you this year, and I like you. I think you have the potential to be a really good person." "Yes, sir," Amory managed to say. He hated when people talked to him like he was a complete screw-up.

“But I’ve noticed,” continued the older man blindly, “that you’re not very popular with the boys.” “No, sir.” Amory licked his lips	"But I've seen," the older man went on, not really noticing, "that the other guys don't seem to like you much." "No, sir." Amory nervously touched his lips.

“Ah—I thought you might not understand exactly what it was they—ah—objected to. I’m going to tell you, because I believe—ah—that when a boy knows his difficulties he’s better able to cope with them—to conform to what others expect of him	"Okay, I figured you might not get what they were upset about. I'll explain it to you because I think knowing your problems helps you deal with them and fit in with what people want."

He a-hemmed again with delicate reticence, and continued: “They seem to think that you’re—ah—rather too fresh—” Amory could stand no more. He rose from his chair, scarcely controlling his voice when he spoke. “I know—oh, don’t you s’pose I know.” His voice rose	He cleared his throat carefully, trying not to be too direct, and went on: “They seem to think you’re—well—a bit too forward—” Amory couldn’t take it anymore. He got up from his chair, barely keeping his voice steady as he said, “I know—you don’t think I know that?” His voice got louder.

“I know what they think; do you s’pose you have to tell me!” He paused. “I’m—I’ve got to go back now—hope I’m not rude—” He left the room hurriedly. In the cool air outside, as he walked to his house, he exulted in his refusal to be helped	"I know what they're thinking; you don't need to tell me!" He stopped for a second. "I—I have to go back now—hope I'm not being rude." He rushed out of the room. Outside, walking home in the cool air, he felt great about refusing their help.

“That damn old fool!” he cried wildly. “As if I didn’t know!” He decided, however, that this was a good excuse not to go back to study hall that night, so, comfortably couched up in his room, he munched Nabiscos and finished The White Company	"That stupid old guy!" he yelled, really upset. "Like I didn't already know!" But then he figured this was a good reason to skip study hall tonight. So he got comfortable in his room, ate Nabiscos, and finished reading "The White Company."

There was a bright star in February. New York burst upon him on Washington’s Birthday with the brilliance of a long-anticipated event. His glimpse of it as a vivid whiteness against a deep-blue sky had left a picture of splendor that rivalled the dream cities in the Arabian Nights; but this time he saw it by electric light, and romance gleamed from the chariot-race sign on Broadway and from the women’s eyes at the Astor, where he and young Paskert from St. Regis’ had dinner	In February, there was a visible star. New York City hit him hard on Washington’s Birthday, like something he'd been waiting for. He'd briefly seen it as a bright white thing against a dark sky, which made him think of amazing, magical cities; but now he saw it lit up with electric lights. The excitement shone from the ad sign on Broadway and from the women he saw at the Astor Hotel, where he and Paskert from St. Regis' had dinner.

When they walked down the aisle of the theatre, greeted by the nervous twanging and discord of untuned violins and the sensuous, heavy fragrance of paint and powder, he moved in a sphere of epicurean delight. Everything enchanted him. The play was The Little Millionaire, with George M	As they walked into the theater, hearing the shaky, off-key sounds of violins and smelling the strong scent of makeup and stage paint, he felt completely happy and indulged. Everything fascinated him. The play was The Little Millionaire, with George M

Cohan, and there was one stunning young brunette who made him sit with brimming eyes in the ecstasy of watching her dance. “Oh—you—wonderful girl, What a wonderful girl you are—” sang the tenor, and Amory agreed silently, but passionately	He saw Cohan's show, and a beautiful brunette dancer really moved him. Watching her dance made him emotional, almost tearful. The singer sang, "Oh, you wonderful girl, what a wonderful girl you are!" and Amory silently but strongly agreed.

“All—your—wonderful words Thrill me through—” The violins swelled and quavered on the last notes, the girl sank to a crumpled butterfly on the stage, a great burst of clapping filled the house. Oh, to fall in love like that, to the languorous magic melody of such a tune! The last scene was laid on a roof-garden, and the cellos sighed to the musical moon, while light adventure and facile froth-like comedy flitted back and forth in the calcium. Amory was on fire to be an habitué of roof-gardens, to meet a girl who should look like that—better, that very girl; whose hair would be drenched with golden moonlight, while at his elbow sparkling wine was poured by an unintelligible waiter. When the curtain fell for the last time he gave such a long sigh that the people in front of him twisted around and stared and said loud enough for him to hear: “What a remarkable-looking boy!” This took his mind off the play, and he wondered if he really did seem handsome to the population of New York	"All your amazing words give me chills!" The music soared, then faded as the actress dramatically collapsed onstage. The audience erupted in applause. He longed to fall in love like that, to that dreamy, magical music. The final scene was set on a rooftop garden, with romantic music playing as a lighthearted, silly comedy played out under the bright lights. Amory suddenly wanted to hang out on rooftops, to find a girl who looked like that actress – no, exactly like her! He imagined her hair glowing in the moonlight as a waiter he couldn't understand filled his glass with champagne. When the play ended, he sighed so deeply that the people in front of him turned around, stared, and said loudly, "What a striking young man!" This distracted him from the play, and he wondered if he really seemed attractive to people in New York.

Paskert and he walked in silence toward their hotel. The former was the first to speak	They walked silently back to their hotel. Paskert spoke first.

His uncertain fifteen-year-old voice broke in in a melancholy strain on Amory’s musings: “I’d marry that girl tonight.” There was no need to ask what girl he referred to	The kid, sounding shaky and only fifteen, interrupted Amory's thoughts in a sad way, saying, "I'd marry that girl right now." Everyone knew which girl he meant.

“I’d be proud to take her home and introduce her to my people,” continued Paskert. Amory was distinctly impressed	"I'd be happy to bring her home and introduce her to my family," Paskert went on. Amory was definitely impressed.

He wished he had said it instead of Paskert. It sounded so mature. “I wonder about actresses; are they all pretty bad?” “No, sir, not by a darn sight,” said the worldly youth with emphasis, “and I know that girl’s as good as gold. I can tell	He wished he'd said that instead of Paskert. It sounded so grown-up. "I wonder about actresses; are they all kind of awful?" "No way, not even close," the experienced guy replied, seriously. "And I know that girl is totally genuine. I can tell."

They wandered on, mixing in the Broadway crowd, dreaming on the music that eddied out of the cafés. New faces flashed on and off like myriad lights, pale or rouged faces, tired, yet sustained by a weary excitement. Amory watched them in fascination	They kept walking, blending into the Broadway crowd, their thoughts drifting with the music coming from the cafes. New faces appeared and disappeared quickly, like tons of lights, some pale, some with makeup, all tired but buzzing with a kind of worn-out energy. Amory was captivated by watching them.

He was planning his life. He was going to live in New York, and be known at every restaurant and café, wearing a dress-suit from early evening to early morning, sleeping away the dull hours of the forenoon. “Yes, sir, I’d marry that girl tonight!”	He was mapping out his future. He wanted to live in New York City, become famous at all the best restaurants and cafes, wear a fancy suit from evening until morning, and sleep through the boring parts of the day. "Yeah, I'd marry that girl in a heartbeat!"

October of his second and last year at St. Regis’ was a high point in Amory’s memory. The game with Groton was played from three of a snappy, exhilarating afternoon far into the crisp autumnal twilight, and Amory at quarterback, exhorting in wild despair, making impossible tackles, calling signals in a voice that had diminished to a hoarse, furious whisper, yet found time to revel in the bloodstained bandage around his head, and the straining, glorious heroism of plunging, crashing bodies and aching limbs. For those minutes courage flowed like wine out of the November dusk, and he was the eternal hero, one with the sea-rover on the prow of a Norse galley, one with Roland and Horatius, Sir Nigel and Ted Coy, scraped and stripped into trim and then flung by his own will into the breach, beating back the tide, hearing from afar the thunder of cheers	October of his second and final year at St. Regis was a highlight for Amory. The Groton game was played on a beautiful, exciting afternoon that stretched into the chilly evening. Amory, as quarterback, yelled desperately, made incredible tackles, and called plays in a voice that was now just a rough, angry whisper. But he still loved the bloody bandage on his head and the amazing, heroic effort of the players crashing and struggling. For that time, courage felt like wine pouring from the November night. He felt like a timeless hero, connected to Vikings on ships, legendary heroes, and even football stars. He was battered and exhausted, but willingly threw himself into the game, fighting against the odds, and hearing the distant roar of the crowd.

finally bruised and weary, but still elusive, circling an end, twisting, changing pace, straight-arming. falling behind the Groton goal with two men on his legs, in the only touchdown of the game.	He was beat up and tired, but still hard to catch, getting close to scoring, dodging, speeding up and slowing down, fighting them off. He finally scored the only touchdown, falling behind Groton's goal line with two guys tackling him.

From the scoffing superiority of sixth-form year and success Amory looked back with cynical wonder on his status of the year before. He was changed as completely as Amory Blaine could ever be changed. Amory plus Beatrice plus two years in Minneapolis—these had been his ingredients when he entered St. Regis’	After being on top in his last year of high school, Amory looked back at how he was a year earlier with disbelief and a bit of mockery. He'd changed a lot, as much as he ever could. Amory, plus Beatrice, plus two years in Minneapolis—that's what made him who he was when he started at St. Regis.

But the Minneapolis years were not a thick enough overlay to conceal the “Amory plus Beatrice” from the ferreting eyes of a boarding-school, so St. Regis’ had very painfully drilled Beatrice out of him, and begun to lay down new and more conventional planking on the fundamental Amory. But both St. Regis’ and Amory were unconscious of the fact that this fundamental Amory had not in himself changed.	Growing up in Minneapolis wasn't enough to hide the connection between Amory and Beatrice from the other kids at boarding school. St. Regis worked hard to get Amory to forget about Beatrice and become more normal. But neither St. Regis nor Amory realized that deep down, Amory was still the same person.

Those qualities for which he had suffered, his moodiness, his tendency to pose, his laziness, and his love of playing the fool, were now taken as a matter of course, recognized eccentricities in a star quarterback, a clever actor, and the editor of the St. Regis Tattler: it puzzled him to see impressionable small boys imitating the very vanities that had not long ago been contemptible weaknesses	The things he used to get in trouble for – being moody, acting like he was someone special, being lazy, and goofing around – were now just accepted. People saw them as quirks of a popular athlete, a talented performer, and the school newspaper editor. He was confused to see younger kids copying the same silly behaviors that used to be seen as flaws.

After the football season he slumped into dreamy content. The night of the pre-holiday dance he slipped away and went early to bed for the pleasure of hearing the violin music cross the grass and come surging in at his window. Many nights he lay there dreaming awake of secret cafés in Mont Martre, where ivory women delved in romantic mysteries with diplomats and soldiers of fortune, while orchestras played Hungarian waltzes and the air was thick and exotic with intrigue and moonlight and adventure	Once football ended, he was happily relaxed. The night before vacation, instead of going to the dance, he went to bed early. He enjoyed listening to the violin music drift across the lawn and fill his room. He often lay awake, fantasizing about hidden cafes in Montmartre. In his imagination, beautiful, mysterious women mixed with diplomats and adventurers. Hungarian waltzes played as the air filled with excitement, secrets, and a sense of romance.

In the spring he read L’Allegro, by request, and was inspired to lyrical outpourings on the subject of Arcady and the pipes of Pan. He moved his bed so that the sun would wake him at dawn that he might dress and go out to the archaic swing that hung from an apple-tree near the sixth-form house. Seating himself in this he would pump higher and higher until he got the effect of swinging into the wide air, into a fairyland of piping satyrs and nymphs with the faces of fair-haired girls he passed in the streets of Eastchester	In the spring, he read "L'Allegro" because someone asked him to, and it made him want to write poems about a perfect, simple world and the music of nature. He moved his bed to wake up with the sun so he could get dressed and go to the old swing hanging from an apple tree near the senior dorm. Sitting there, he'd swing really high, imagining he was swinging into open air, into a fantasy world of music, playful creatures, and beautiful girls who looked like the blonde girls he saw in town.

As the swing reached its highest point, Arcady really lay just over the brow of a certain hill, where the brown road dwindled out of sight in a golden dot. He read voluminously all spring, the beginning of his eighteenth year: The Gentleman from Indiana, The New Arabian Nights, The Morals of Marcus Ordeyne, The Man Who Was Thursday, which he liked without understanding; Stover at Yale, that became somewhat of a textbook; Dombey and Son, because he thought he really should read better stuff; Robert Chambers, David Graham Phillips, and E. Phillips Oppenheim complete, and a scattering of Tennyson and Kipling	When he swung up really high, it felt like paradise was just on the other side of the hill, where the road disappeared in the distance. He spent the spring of his eighteenth year reading a ton of books, including: "The Gentleman from Indiana," "The New Arabian Nights," "The Morals of Marcus Ordeyne," and "The Man Who Was Thursday," which he enjoyed even though he didn't fully get it. He also read "Stover at Yale," which he used almost like a study guide; "Dombey and Son," because he felt he should read more serious books; and everything he could find by Robert Chambers, David Graham Phillips, and E. Phillips Oppenheim. Plus, he read some Tennyson and Kipling.

Of all his class work only L’Allegro and some quality of rigid clarity in solid geometry stirred his languid interest. As June drew near, he felt the need of conversation to formulate his own ideas, and, to his surprise, found a co-philosopher in Rahill, the president of the sixth form	He didn't care much about schoolwork, except for "L'Allegro" and how clear and logical geometry was. As summer got closer, he realized he needed to talk to someone to figure out what he really thought. He was surprised to find someone who thought like him in Rahill, the senior class president.

In many a talk, on the high road or lying belly-down along the edge of the baseball diamond, or late at night with their cigarettes glowing in the dark, they threshed out the questions of school, and there was developed the term “slicker.” “Got tobacco?” whispered Rahill one night, putting his head inside the door five minutes after lights	They talked about school a lot, whether they were walking around, hanging out at the baseball field, or staying up late smoking. That's how the word "slicker" got started. One night, Rahill stuck his head in the door after lights out and whispered, "Got any smokes?"

“Sure.” “I’m coming in.” “Take a couple of pillows and lie in the window-seat, why don’t you	"Okay." "I'm coming inside." "Grab some pillows and lie down on the window seat, why don't you?"

Amory sat up in bed and lit a cigarette while Rahill settled for a conversation. Rahill’s favorite subject was the respective futures of the sixth form, and Amory never tired of outlining them for his benefit	Amory sat up in bed, lighting a cigarette as Rahill got ready to chat. Rahill loved talking about what would happen to the seniors after graduation, and Amory always enjoyed predicting their futures for him.

“Ted Converse? ’At’s easy. He’ll fail his exams, tutor all summer at Harstrum’s, get into Sheff with about four conditions, and flunk out in the middle of the freshman year. Then he’ll go back West and raise hell for a year or so; finally his father will make him go into the paint business. He’ll marry and have four sons, all bone heads	"Ted Converse? That's predictable. He'll fail his tests, spend the whole summer tutoring at Harstrum's, barely get into Sheff with a lot of academic problems, and then drop out halfway through his first year. After that, he'll go back out West, party hard for about a year, and then his dad will force him to work at the family paint business. He'll get married and have four sons, all of whom will be really dumb."

He’ll always think St. Regis’s spoiled him, so he’ll send his sons to day school in Portland. He’ll die of locomotor ataxia when he’s forty-one, and his wife will give a baptizing stand or whatever you call it to the Presbyterian Church, with his name on it—” “Hold up, Amory	He'll always believe the St. Regis Hotel made him a snob, so he'll send his kids to a regular school in Portland. He'll die young from a disease, and his wife will donate something, like a baptism thing, to the church in his memory.” “Wait, Amory!

That’s too darned gloomy. How about yourself?” “I’m in a superior class. You are, too	That's way too depressing. What about you?" "I'm doing really well. You are too."

We’re philosophers.” “I’m not.” “Sure you are	"We're deep thinkers." "I'm not." "Yes, you are."

You’ve got a darn good head on you.” But Amory knew that nothing in the abstract, no theory or generality, ever moved Rahill until he stubbed his toe upon the concrete minutiae of it	"You're really smart." But Amory knew Rahill never cared about big ideas or theories until they affected him personally in a small, real way.

“Haven’t,” insisted Rahill. “I let people impose on me here and don’t get anything out of it. I’m the prey of my friends, damn it—do their lessons, get ’em out of trouble, pay ’em stupid summer visits, and always entertain their kid sisters; keep my temper when they get selfish and then they think they pay me back by voting for me and telling me I’m the ‘big man’ of St. Regis’s.	"No way," Rahill argued. "I let people take advantage of me here and get nothing in return. My friends treat me like a sucker, damn it—I do their homework, get them out of jams, visit them during the boring summer, and always have to entertain their little sisters; I bite my tongue when they act selfish, and then they think they're paying me back by voting for me and calling me the 'big shot' at St. Regis's."

I want to get where everybody does their own work and I can tell people where to go	I want to be in a place where everyone's responsible, and I can tell people what to do.

I’m tired of being nice to every poor fish in school.” “You’re not a slicker,” said Amory suddenly. “A what?” “A slicker.” “What the devil’s that?” “Well, it’s something that—that—there’s a lot of them	I'm done being friendly to every loser at school." "You're not a show-off," Amory said out of nowhere. "A what?" "A show-off." "What the heck is that?" "Well, it's someone who—who—there are a lot of them..."

You’re not one, and neither am I, though I am more than you are.” “Who is one? What makes you one?” Amory considered	"You're not a truly genuine person, and neither am I, even though I'm more real than you." "Who is a genuine person? What makes someone real?" Amory thought about it.

“Why—why, I suppose that the sign of it is when a fellow slicks his hair back with water.” “Like Carstairs?” “Yes—sure. He’s a slicker	"How can you tell?" "Well, I guess it's when a guy uses water to style his hair." "Like Carstairs does?" "Yeah, definitely. He's a total hair-slicker."

They spent two evenings getting an exact definition. The slicker was good-looking or clean-looking; he had brains, social brains, that is, and he used all means on the broad path of honesty to get ahead, be popular, admired, and never in trouble. He dressed well, was particularly neat in appearance, and derived his name from the fact that his hair was inevitably worn short, soaked in water or tonic, parted in the middle, and slicked back as the current of fashion dictated	They spent two evenings figuring out exactly what a "slicker" was. A slicker was someone good-looking and sharp. They were socially intelligent and used every fair trick in the book to succeed, be liked, and stay out of trouble. They dressed well, were always very neat, and got their name because they always kept their hair short, wet or shiny with product, parted in the middle, and slicked back to follow the latest style.

The slickers of that year had adopted tortoiseshell spectacles as badges of their slickerhood, and this made them so easy to recognize that Amory and Rahill never missed one. The slicker seemed distributed through school, always a little wiser and shrewder than his contemporaries, managing some team or other, and keeping his cleverness carefully concealed. Amory found the slicker a most valuable classification until his junior year in college, when the outline became so blurred and indeterminate that it had to be subdivided many times, and became only a quality	Back then, the cool kids wore tortoiseshell glasses to show they were cool. They were easy to spot, so Amory and Rahill never missed them. These "cool kids" were everywhere in school, always acting a bit smarter and sharper than everyone else. They usually ran some kind of team and kept their smarts under wraps. Amory found this "cool kid" label really useful until his junior year of college. After that, it got too vague and complicated, so he had to break it down into smaller categories. It just became one quality among many.

Amory’s secret ideal had all the slicker qualifications, but, in addition, courage and tremendous brains and talents—also Amory conceded him a bizarre streak that was quite irreconcilable to the slicker proper. This was a first real break from the hypocrisy of school tradition	Amory's perfect guy was cool and successful, but also brave, super smart, and talented. Plus, Amory thought he had a weird side that didn't fit the "cool" mold at all. This was the first time Amory truly rejected the fake standards of school.

The slicker was a definite element of success, differing intrinsically from the prep school “big man.”	Being a smooth talker was key to getting ahead, and it was different from just being popular in high school.

At first Amory noticed only the wealth of sunshine creeping across the long, green swards, dancing on the leaded windowpanes, and swimming around the tops of spires and towers and battlemented walls. Gradually he realized that he was really walking up University Place, self-conscious about his suitcase, developing a new tendency to glare straight ahead when he passed anyone. Several times he could have sworn that men turned to look at him critically. He wondered vaguely if there was something the matter with his clothes, and wished he had shaved that morning on the train	At first, Amory just saw the bright sunshine spreading over the long, green lawns, sparkling on the windows, and shining around the tops of the towers and walls. Then he realized he was actually walking up University Place, feeling awkward about his suitcase, and starting to stare straight ahead when he passed people. He thought some men were turning to look at him in a judgmental way. He wondered if something was wrong with his clothes and wished he'd shaved on the train that morning.

He felt unnecessarily stiff and awkward among these white-flannelled, bareheaded youths, who must be juniors and seniors, judging from the savoir faire with which they strolled. He found that 12 University Place was a large, dilapidated mansion, at present apparently uninhabited, though he knew it housed usually a dozen freshmen	He felt out of place and uncomfortable around these young guys in white pants, without hats, who seemed like upperclassmen because they were so confident and cool. He noticed that 12 University Place was a big, run-down house, that looked empty now, even though he knew it usually had a dozen freshmen living there.

After a hurried skirmish with his landlady he sallied out on a tour of exploration, but he had gone scarcely a block when he became horribly conscious that he must be the only man in town who was wearing a hat. He returned hurriedly to 12 University, left his derby, and, emerging bareheaded, loitered down Nassau Street, stopping to investigate a display of athletic photographs in a store window, including a large one of Allenby, the football captain, and next attracted by the sign “Jigger Shop” over a confectionary window	After quickly dealing with his landlady, he went out to explore. But he hadn't walked far before he realized he was the only guy in town wearing a hat. He rushed back to his place, took off his hat, and then wandered down Nassau Street without it. He stopped to check out some sports photos in a store window, including a big one of Allenby, the football captain. Then he noticed a sign that said "Jigger Shop" above a candy store.

This sounded familiar, so he sauntered in and took a seat on a high stool. “Chocolate sundae,” he told a colored person. “Double chocolate jiggah? Anything else?” “Why—yes	This sounded familiar, so he casually walked in and sat on a tall stool. "Chocolate sundae," he said to a Black person. "Double chocolate jiggah? Anything else?" "Yes—"

“Bacon bun?” “Why—yes.” He munched four of these, finding them of pleasing savor, and then consumed another double-chocolate jigger before ease descended upon him. After a cursory inspection of the pillowcases, leather pennants, and Gibson Girls that lined the walls, he left, and continued along Nassau Street with his hands in his pockets	"Bacon roll?" "Sure, why not." He ate four, really enjoying them, and then had another double-chocolate drink before he started to feel relaxed. He glanced quickly at the pillowcases, leather flags, and pictures of Gibson Girls on the walls, then left. He walked down Nassau Street with his hands in his pockets.

Gradually he was learning to distinguish between upper classmen and entering men, even though the freshman cap would not appear until the following Monday. Those who were too obviously, too nervously at home were freshmen, for as each train brought a new contingent it was immediately absorbed into the hatless, white-shod, book-laden throng, whose function seemed to be to drift endlessly up and down the street, emitting great clouds of smoke from brand-new pipes. By afternoon Amory realized that now the newest arrivals were taking him for an upper classman, and he tried conscientiously to look both pleasantly blasé and casually critical, which was as near as he could analyze the prevalent facial expression	He was starting to tell the older students from the new ones, even though the freshmen weren't supposed to wear their beanies until next week. The freshmen were the ones who seemed way too comfortable and eager to be there. Every time a new trainload of them showed up, they'd get swallowed up by the crowd of students without hats, wearing white shoes, and carrying a ton of books. All they seemed to do was wander around, puffing away on new pipes. By the afternoon, Amory noticed that the new kids were mistaking him for an older student. So, he tried hard to look bored but friendly and a little judgmental, which was his best guess at what everyone else looked like.

At five o’clock he felt the need of hearing his own voice, so he retreated to his house to see if anyone else had arrived. Having climbed the rickety stairs he scrutinized his room resignedly, concluding that it was hopeless to attempt any more inspired decoration than class banners and tiger pictures. There was a tap at the door	Around 5 PM, he wanted to talk to someone, so he went back to his house to see if anyone was there. He walked up the shaky stairs, looked around his room with disappointment, and decided there was no point in trying to decorate it better than with school flags and pictures of tigers. Someone knocked on the door.

“Come in!” A slim face with gray eyes and a humorous smile appeared in the doorway. “Got a hammer?” “No—sorry	"Come in!" A thin person with gray eyes and a funny smile showed up in the doorway. "Do you have a hammer?" "No, sorry."

Maybe Mrs. Twelve, or whatever she goes by, has one.” The stranger advanced into the room. “You an inmate of this asylum?” Amory nodded	"Maybe Mrs. Twelve, or whatever her name is, has one." The guy walked further into the room. "Do you live here, in this mental hospital?" Amory nodded.

“Awful barn for the rent we pay.” Amory had to agree that it was. “I thought of the campus,” he said, “but they say there’s so few freshmen that they’re lost. Have to sit around and study for something to do	"This place is a dump for what we're paying." Amory agreed. "I thought about staying on campus," he said, "but they say there aren't enough new students, so everyone's bored. They just end up studying because there's nothing else to do."

The gray-eyed man decided to introduce himself. “My name’s Holiday.” “Blaine’s my name.” They shook hands with the fashionable low swoop	The guy with the gray eyes decided to say hello. "I'm Holiday," he said. "I'm Blaine." They shook hands in that cool, new way.

Amory grinned. “Where’d you prep?” “Andover—where did you?” “St. Regis’s.” “Oh, did you? I had a cousin there	Amory smiled. "Where'd you go to boarding school?" "Andover. Where did you go?" "St. Regis." "Oh, really? I had a cousin who went there."

They discussed the cousin thoroughly, and then Holiday announced that he was to meet his brother for dinner at six. “Come along and have a bite with us.” “All right.” At the Kenilworth Amory met Burne Holiday—he of the gray eyes was Kerry—and during a limpid meal of thin soup and anaemic vegetables they stared at the other freshmen, who sat either in small groups looking very ill at ease, or in large groups seeming very much at home	They talked about the cousin in detail, and then Holiday said he was meeting his brother for dinner at six. "Come eat with us." "Okay." At the Kenilworth, Amory met Burne Holiday (the one with gray eyes was Kerry). During a light meal of watery soup and pale vegetables, they looked at the other first-year students, who were either in small, uncomfortable groups or large groups that seemed very comfortable.

“I hear Commons is pretty bad,” said Amory. “That’s the rumor. But you’ve got to eat there—or pay anyways	"I hear the dining hall sucks," Amory said. "That's what people are saying. But you have to eat there – or at least pay for it anyway."

“Crime!” “Imposition!” “Oh, at Princeton you’ve got to swallow everything the first year. It’s like a damned prep school.” Amory agreed. “Lot of pep, though,” he insisted	"That's awful!" "Unfair!" "Ugh, at Princeton, you have to put up with everything during your first year. It's like being back in boarding school." Amory agreed, adding, "It's got a lot of energy, though."

“I wouldn’t have gone to Yale for a million.” “Me either.” “You going out for anything?” inquired Amory of the elder brother. “Not me—Burne here is going out for the Prince—the Daily Princetonian, you know	"I wouldn't go to Yale even if they paid me a million dollars." "Same here." "Are you trying out for any activities?" Amory asked the older brother. "Not me—Burne's trying out for the *Prince*—you know, the school newspaper."

“Yes, I know.” “You going out for anything?” “Why—yes	"Yeah, I know." "Are you going out for something?" "Oh—yeah."

I’m going to take a whack at freshman football.” “Play at St. Regis’s?” “Some,” admitted Amory depreciatingly, “but I’m getting so damned thin	I'm gonna try out for the freshman football team." "Did you play at St. Regis's?" "A little," Amory said, downplaying it, "but I'm getting way too skinny."

“You’re not thin.” “Well, I used to be stocky last fall	"You're not skinny." "Yeah, I was kind of chunky last autumn."

“Oh!” After supper they attended the movies, where Amory was fascinated by the glib comments of a man in front of him, as well as by the wild yelling and shouting. “Yoho!” “Oh, honey-baby—you’re so big and strong, but oh, so gentle!” “Clinch!” “Oh, Clinch!” “Kiss her, kiss ’at lady, quick!” “Oh-h-h—!” A group began whistling “By the Sea,” and the audience took it up noisily	"Wow!" After dinner, they went to the movies. Amory was really interested in the funny remarks from the guy in front of him, and also by all the loud yelling. "Yoho!" "Oh, baby, you're so big and strong, but so gentle!" "Kiss!" "Oh, kiss!" "Kiss her, kiss that lady, hurry up!" "Oh-h-h!" Some people started whistling "By the Sea," and the whole crowd joined in loudly.

This was followed by an indistinguishable song that included much stamping and then by an endless, incoherent dirge. “Oh-h-h-h-h She works in a Jam Factoree And—that-may-be-all-right But you can’t-fool-me For I know—damn—well That she don’t-make-jam-all-night! Oh-h-h-h!” As they pushed out, giving and receiving curious impersonal glances, Amory decided that he liked the movies, wanted to enjoy them as the row of upper classmen in front had enjoyed them, with their arms along the backs of the seats, their comments Gaelic and caustic, their attitude a mixture of critical wit and tolerant amusement. “Want a sundae—I mean a jigger?” asked Kerry	After that, there was a hard-to-understand song with lots of stomping, and then a long, rambling, sad song. It went something like: "Oh-h-h-h-h She works in a Jam Factoree And—that-may-be-all-right But you can’t-fool-me For I know—damn—well That she don’t-make-jam-all-night! Oh-h-h-h!" As people left the theater, glancing at each other without really connecting, Amory decided he liked movies. He wanted to enjoy them like the older, rich guys in front of him had, leaning back with their arms stretched out, making sharp, funny jokes in their own slang, acting both smart and amused. "Want a sundae—I mean a drink?" Kerry asked.

“Sure.” They suppered heavily and then, still sauntering, eased back to 12. “Wonderful night.” “It’s a whiz	"Okay." They ate a big dinner and then, still walking slowly, casually went back to their dorm, 12 University Place. "Great night." "It's fantastic."

“You men going to unpack?” “Guess so. Come on, Burne.” Amory decided to sit for a while on the front steps, so he bade them good night. The great tapestries of trees had darkened to ghosts back at the last edge of twilight	"You guys gonna unpack?" "Yeah, I guess. Let's go, Burne." Amory decided to chill on the front steps for a bit, so he told them good night. The trees, like huge tapestries, had faded into dark shapes as the last bit of twilight disappeared.

The early moon had drenched the arches with pale blue, and, weaving over the night, in and out of the gossamer rifts of moon, swept a song, a song with more than a hint of sadness, infinitely transient, infinitely regretful. He remembered that an alumnus of the nineties had told him of one of Booth Tarkington’s amusements: standing in mid-campus in the small hours and singing tenor songs to the stars, arousing mingled emotions in the couched undergraduates according to the sentiment of their moods. Now, far down the shadowy line of University Place a white-clad phalanx broke the gloom, and marching figures, white-shirted, white-trousered, swung rhythmically up the street, with linked arms and heads thrown back: “Going back—going back, Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall, Going back—going back— To the—Best—Old—Place—of—All	The moonlight was pale blue on the archways. A song seemed to float through the night, weaving in and out of the thin clouds, a song that was sad, fleeting, and full of regret. He remembered someone from the 1890s telling him that Booth Tarkington used to sing loudly to the stars in the middle of campus late at night. This made the students in their rooms feel all sorts of things, depending on how they were feeling already. Then, in the distance on University Place, a group of people in white clothes appeared and marched rhythmically up the street, arms linked and heads back, singing: "Going back—going back, Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall, Going back—going back— To the—Best—Old—Place—of—All!"

Going back—going back, From all—this—earthly—ball, We’ll—clear—the—track—as—we—go—back— Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall!” Amory closed his eyes as the ghostly procession drew near. The song soared so high that all dropped out except the tenors, who bore the melody triumphantly past the danger-point and relinquished it to the fantastic chorus	"Going back, going back from this whole world, we'll get out of the way as we go back, going back to Nassau Hall!" Amory closed his eyes as the imaginary parade got closer. The song got so loud and high that everyone stopped singing except the tenors, who carried the main tune strongly past the difficult part and then gave it back to the wild choir.

Then Amory opened his eyes, half afraid that sight would spoil the rich illusion of harmony. He sighed eagerly. There at the head of the white platoon marched Allenby, the football captain, slim and defiant, as if aware that this year the hopes of the college rested on him, that his hundred-and-sixty pounds were expected to dodge to victory through the heavy blue and crimson lines. Fascinated, Amory watched each rank of linked arms as it came abreast, the faces indistinct above the polo shirts, the voices blent in a paean of triumph—and then the procession passed through shadowy Campbell Arch, and the voices grew fainter as it wound eastward over the campus	Amory opened his eyes, almost scared that seeing things would ruin the amazing feeling of peace he had. He sighed, wanting more. Allenby, the football captain, was leading the way, looking confident and a little cocky. He was thin but tough, like he knew the whole school was counting on him to win this year. Everyone expected him to carry the team to victory, even though he only weighed 160 pounds and had to get past some big, tough players. Amory was hooked, watching each line of guys with their arms linked as they walked by. He couldn't really see their faces above their polo shirts, but their voices all mixed together in a song of victory. Then, they went through the dark Campbell Arch, and their singing got quieter as they walked away across campus.

The minutes passed and Amory sat there very quietly. He regretted the rule that would forbid freshmen to be outdoors after curfew, for he wanted to ramble through the shadowy scented lanes, where Witherspoon brooded like a dark mother over Whig and Clio, her Attic children, where the black Gothic snake of Little curled down to Cuyler and Patton, these in turn flinging the mystery out over the placid slope rolling to the lake. Princeton of the daytime filtered slowly into his consciousness—West and Reunion, redolent of the sixties, Seventy-nine Hall, brick-red and arrogant, Upper and Lower Pyne, aristocratic Elizabethan ladies not quite content to live among shopkeepers, and, topping all, climbing with clear blue aspiration, the great dreaming spires of Holder and Cleveland towers	Time ticked by, and Amory sat silently. He was annoyed by the rule that kept first-year students inside after curfew. He wished he could wander the dark, sweet-smelling paths where the university library seemed like a watchful, protective mother watching over its two famous debate societies. He imagined the dark, winding path of a dormitory leading down to other dorms which then spread the feeling of mystery and wonder out across the quiet lawn sloping down to the lake. During the day, Princeton slowly came into focus for him. He thought about buildings like West and Reunion, which smelled like the 1860s. He pictured Seventy-nine Hall, a brick-red, imposing building. He saw Upper and Lower Pyne, dorms that seemed like elegant, old-fashioned ladies a bit out of place surrounded by ordinary students. Above everything else, the tall, dreamy towers of Holder and Cleveland reached up into the clear blue sky.

From the first he loved Princeton—its lazy beauty, its half-grasped significance, the wild moonlight revel of the rushes, the handsome, prosperous big-game crowds, and under it all the air of struggle that pervaded his class. From the day when, wild-eyed and exhausted, the jerseyed freshmen sat in the gymnasium and elected someone from Hill School class president, a Lawrenceville celebrity vice-president, a hockey star from St. Paul’s secretary, up until the end of sophomore year it never ceased, that breathless social system, that worship, seldom named, never really admitted, of the bogey “Big Man.” First it was schools, and Amory, alone from St. Regis’, watched the crowds form and widen and form again;	He loved Princeton right away. He liked how pretty and relaxed it was, the things he kind of understood about it, the crazy fun people had at parties, and the rich, popular students. But underneath it all, he felt the pressure to succeed in his class. From the very beginning, when the new, tired freshmen picked a class president from Hill School, a vice-president who was famous at Lawrenceville, and a popular hockey player from St. Paul's to be secretary, all the way until the end of their second year, there was this constant, hectic social scene. Everyone admired, but never talked about or admitted, the ideal of being a "Big Man" on campus. At first, it was all about which prep school you went to. Amory, who was the only one from St. Regis', watched groups of people form and change over and over.

St. Paul’s, Hill, Pomfret, eating at certain tacitly reserved tables in Commons, dressing in their own corners of the gymnasium, and drawing unconsciously about them a barrier of the slightly less important but socially ambitious to protect them from the friendly, rather puzzled high-school element. From the moment he realized this Amory resented social barriers as artificial distinctions made by the strong to bolster up their weak retainers and keep out the almost strong	Kids from fancy boarding schools like St. Paul's, Hill, and Pomfret had their own thing going. They sat at specific, unspoken-for tables in the dining hall, changed in their own spots in the gym, and without even trying, attracted less popular, but still status-conscious kids who created a buffer, keeping away the regular, confused high schoolers who just wanted to be friends. From the moment Amory noticed this, he hated social barriers, seeing them as fake rules made by the powerful to prop up their followers and exclude anyone who almost made the cut.

Having decided to be one of the gods of the class, he reported for freshman football practice, but in the second week, playing quarterback, already paragraphed in corners of the Princetonian, he wrenched his knee seriously enough to put him out for the rest of the season. This forced him to retire and consider the situation. “12 Univee” housed a dozen miscellaneous question-marks. There were three or four inconspicuous and quite startled boys from Lawrenceville, two amateur wild men from a New York private school (Kerry Holiday christened them the “plebeian drunks”), a Jewish youth, also from New York, and, as compensation for Amory, the two Holidays, to whom he took an instant fancy	He wanted to be a big shot, so he tried out for freshman football. But in the second week, while playing quarterback, and already getting mentioned in the school paper, he hurt his knee badly and couldn't play anymore. He had to quit and think about what to do next. His dorm, "12 Univee," had a bunch of random and unsure guys living there. There were a few quiet and surprised kids from Lawrenceville, two crazy guys from a New York private school (Kerry Holiday called them the "drunk freshmen"), a Jewish guy, also from New York, and, luckily for Amory, the two Holidays, who he liked right away.

The Holidays were rumored twins, but really the dark-haired one, Kerry, was a year older than his blond brother, Burne. Kerry was tall, with humorous gray eyes, and a sudden, attractive smile; he became at once the mentor of the house, reaper of ears that grew too high, censor of conceit, vendor of rare, satirical humor. Amory spread the table of their future friendship with all his ideas of what college should and did mean	People said the Holiday brothers were twins, but Kerry, who had dark hair, was actually a year older than Burne, who was blond. Kerry was tall with funny gray eyes and a great smile. Right away, he became the leader of the group, cutting down anyone who got too big for their britches, criticizing anyone who was arrogant, and making everyone laugh with his witty and sarcastic jokes. Amory eagerly shared all his ideas about what college was supposed to be and what it meant, hoping it would be the basis for a good friendship.

Kerry, not inclined as yet to take things seriously, chided him gently for being curious at this inopportune time about the intricacies of the social system, but liked him and was both interested and amused. Burne, fair-haired, silent, and intent, appeared in the house only as a busy apparition, gliding in quietly at night and off again in the early morning to get up his work in the library—he was out for the Princetonian, competing furiously against forty others for the coveted first place	Kerry, who wasn't ready to be serious, teased him for asking about complicated social stuff at the wrong time, but she liked him and found him interesting and funny. Burne, blond, quiet, and focused, was barely seen at home. He’d slip in late at night and leave early to work in the library, trying hard to win first place on the Princetonian magazine against forty other people.

In December he came down with diphtheria, and someone else won the competition, but, returning to college in February, he dauntlessly went after the prize again. Necessarily, Amory’s acquaintance with him was in the way of three-minute chats, walking to and from lectures, so he failed to penetrate Burne’s one absorbing interest and find what lay beneath it. Amory was far from contented	He got diphtheria in December and lost the contest, but when he went back to school in February, he wasn't discouraged and tried for the prize again. Amory only knew him from short talks while walking to class, so he couldn't figure out what Burne really cared about or what was beneath the surface. Amory wasn't happy about this.

He missed the place he had won at St. Regis’, the being known and admired, yet Princeton stimulated him, and there were many things ahead calculated to arouse the Machiavelli latent in him, could he but insert a wedge. The upper-class clubs, concerning which he had pumped a reluctant graduate during the previous summer, excited his curiosity: Ivy, detached and breathlessly aristocratic; Cottage, an impressive mélange of brilliant adventurers and well-dressed philanderers; Tiger Inn, broad-shouldered and athletic, vitalized by an honest elaboration of prep-school standards; Cap and Gown, anti-alcoholic, faintly religious and politically powerful; flamboyant Colonial; literary Quadrangle; and the dozen others, varying in age and position. Anything which brought an under classman into too glaring a light was labelled with the damning brand of “running it out	He missed being popular and respected at St. Regis', but Princeton was interesting. Lots of opportunities were coming up that could bring out his ambitious side, if he could just find a way in. He was curious about the exclusive upperclassmen clubs he'd heard about from a graduate he'd grilled last summer: Ivy, super exclusive and snobby; Cottage, a mix of smart risk-takers and well-dressed players; Tiger Inn, full of jocks living by high school rules; Cap and Gown, straight-laced, kind of religious, and politically connected; the flashy Colonial; the Quadrangle for writers; and a bunch of other clubs, all different. Anything that made a freshman stand out too much was called "trying too hard."

The movies thrived on caustic comments, but the men who made them were generally running it out; talking of clubs was running it out; standing for anything very strongly, as, for instance, drinking parties or teetotalling, was running it out; in short, being personally conspicuous was not tolerated, and the influential man was the noncommittal man, until at club elections in sophomore year everyone should be sewed up in some bag for the rest of his college career. Amory found that writing for the Nassau Literary Magazine would get him nothing, but that being on the board of the Daily Princetonian would get anyone a good deal. His vague desire to do immortal acting with the English Dramatic Association faded out when he found that the most ingenious brains and talents were concentrated upon the Triangle Club, a musical comedy organization that every year took a great Christmas trip. In the meanwhile, feeling strangely alone and restless in Commons, with new desires and ambitions stirring in his mind, he let the first term go by between an envy of the embryo successes and a puzzled fretting with Kerry as to why they were not accepted immediately among the elite of the class	Movies loved making sharp, critical jokes, but the guys making them were just trying to coast. Talking about clubs was just going through the motions. Taking a strong stand on anything, like being a heavy drinker or a total abstainer, was also a no-no. Basically, standing out wasn't allowed. The guy with influence was the one who stayed neutral, at least until everyone got locked into a social group during sophomore year club elections, which would define their whole college experience. Amory realized writing for the "Nassau Literary Magazine" wouldn't get him anywhere, but being on the newspaper staff would. His dream of doing amazing acting with the drama club faded when he saw that all the really talented and smart people were focused on the "Triangle Club," a musical comedy group that went on a big Christmas tour every year. So, feeling lonely and uneasy in the dining hall, with new goals and dreams bubbling up, he spent the first semester feeling jealous of the guys who were already successful and wondering with Kerry why they weren't instantly popular.

Many afternoons they lounged in the windows of 12 Univee and watched the class pass to and from Commons, noting satellites already attaching themselves to the more prominent, watching the lonely grind with his hurried step and downcast eye, envying the happy security of the big school groups. “We’re the damned middle class, that’s what!” he complained to Kerry one day as he lay stretched out on the sofa, consuming a family of Fatimas with contemplative precision. “Well, why not? We came to Princeton so we could feel that way toward the small colleges—have it on ’em, more self-confidence, dress better, cut a swathe—” “Oh, it isn’t that I mind the glittering caste system,” admitted Amory	They spent a lot of afternoons chilling by the windows at 12 Univee, watching students walk to and from meals. They noticed the popular kids already attracting followers. They also saw the lonely, hardworking student rushing by, looking sad, and envied the secure feeling of being in a big friend group. "We're just stuck in the middle, that's all!" he grumbled to Kerry one day, sprawled on the couch, carefully smoking a bunch of cigarettes. "So what if we are? We came to Princeton to look down on the smaller schools—to feel superior, be more confident, dress better, make a splash—" "It's not that I hate the fancy social hierarchy," Amory said.

“I like having a bunch of hot cats on top, but gosh, Kerry, I’ve got to be one of them.” “But just now, Amory, you’re only a sweaty bourgeois	"I like being with all the cool, popular people, but man, Kerry, I need to *be* one of them." "Right now, Amory, you just seem like a basic, privileged guy sweating too much."

Amory lay for a moment without speaking. “I won’t be—long,” he said finally. “But I hate to get anywhere by working for it. I’ll show the marks, don’t you know	Amory was quiet for a second. “I’ll get over it soon,” he said. “But I hate succeeding through hard work. It’ll leave a lasting impression on me, you know?"

“Honorable scars.” Kerry craned his neck suddenly at the street. “There’s Langueduc, if you want to see what he looks like—and Humbird just behind	"Cool scars." Kerry quickly looked up the street. "There's Langueduc, if you want to see him—and Humbird's right behind."

Amory rose dynamically and sought the windows. “Oh,” he said, scrutinizing these worthies, “Humbird looks like a knockout, but this Langueduc—he’s the rugged type, isn’t he? I distrust that sort. All diamonds look big in the rough	Amory jumped up and went to the windows. "Wow," he said, looking closely at the people, "Humbird's a hottie, but Langueduc looks tough, right? I don't trust guys like that. Everyone looks impressive before you get to know them."

“Well,” said Kerry, as the excitement subsided, “you’re a literary genius. It’s up to you	"Okay," Kerry said, after things calmed down, "you're a writing genius. It's your call."

“I wonder”—Amory paused—“if I could be. I honestly think so sometimes	"I wonder," Amory stopped, "if I could be. I really think I could sometimes."

That sounds like the devil, and I wouldn’t say it to anybody except you.” “Well—go ahead	That sounds awful, and I'd only say it to you." "Okay, tell me."

Let your hair grow and write poems like this guy D’Invilliers in the Lit.” Amory reached lazily at a pile of magazines on the table	"Grow your hair out and write poems like D'Invilliers in the literature magazine." Amory reached for some magazines on the table, moving without much effort.

“Read his latest effort?” “Never miss ’em. They’re rare.” Amory glanced through the issue. “Hello!” he said in surprise, “he’s a freshman, isn’t he?” “Yeah	"Read his new story?" "Always. They don't come out often." Amory flipped through the magazine. "Wow!" he said, surprised. "He's a freshman, right?" "Yeah."

“Listen to this! My God! “ ‘A serving lady speaks: Black velvet trails its folds over the day, White tapers, prisoned in their silver frames, Wave their thin flames like shadows in the wind, Pia, Pompia, come—come away—’ “Now, what the devil does that mean?” “It’s a pantry scene.” “ ‘Her toes are stiffened like a stork’s in flight; She’s laid upon her bed, on the white sheets, Her hands pressed on her smooth bust like a saint, Bella Cunizza, come into the light!’ “My gosh, Kerry, what in hell is it all about? I swear I don’t get him at all, and I’m a literary bird myself.” “It’s pretty tricky,” said Kerry, “only you’ve got to think of hearses and stale milk when you read it. That isn’t as pash as some of them	"Listen to this! Wow! 'A maid says: Black velvet spreads across the day, White candles, held in silver holders, flicker like shadows in the wind, Pia, Pompia, come—come away—'" Now, what does that even mean?" "It's a kitchen scene." "'Her toes are stiff like a stork's in flight; She's lying on her bed, on white sheets, Her hands pressed on her chest like a saint, Bella Cunizza, come into the light!'" "Man, Kerry, what's it all about? I don't get him at all, and I know a lot about literature." "It's complicated," Kerry said, "you have to think about death and old, sour milk when you read it. It's not as showy as some of his other stuff."

Amory tossed the magazine on the table. “Well,” he sighed, “I sure am up in the air. I know I’m not a regular fellow, yet I loathe anybody else that isn’t	Amory threw the magazine down. "Well," he said with a sigh, "I'm really confused. I know I'm not normal, but I hate anyone who isn't."

I can’t decide whether to cultivate my mind and be a great dramatist, or to thumb my nose at the Golden Treasury and be a Princeton slicker.” “Why decide?” suggested Kerry. “Better drift, like me. I’m going to sail into prominence on Burne’s coattails	"I'm not sure if I should focus on studying and becoming a famous writer, or just goof off and be a cool Princeton student." "Why choose?" Kerry replied. "Better to just go with the flow, like I am. I'm going to become successful by riding on Burne's success."

“I can’t drift—I want to be interested. I want to pull strings, even for somebody else, or be Princetonian chairman or Triangle president. I want to be admired, Kerry.” “You’re thinking too much about yourself	"I can't just float along; I want to be involved. I want to have influence, even if it's to help someone else, or be in charge of something big at Princeton, like a club leader. I want people to look up to me, Kerry." "You're focused too much on yourself."

Amory sat up at this. “No. I’m thinking about you, too. We’ve got to get out and mix around the class right now, when it’s fun to be a snob	Amory straightened up, interested. "No, wait. I'm thinking about you as well. We need to go out and meet a lot of people in our class now, while it's actually cool to be stuck-up."

I’d like to bring a sardine to the prom in June, for instance, but I wouldn’t do it unless I could be damn debonaire about it—introduce her to all the prize parlor-snakes, and the football captain, and all that simple stuff.” “Amory,” said Kerry impatiently, “you’re just going around in a circle	"Like, I might want to take a really boring girl to prom in June, but only if I could be super smooth about it—introduce her to all the popular girls and the football star, you know, the usual stuff." "Amory," Kerry said, annoyed, "you're not making any sense."

If you want to be prominent, get out and try for something; if you don’t, just take it easy.” He yawned. “Come on, let’s let the smoke drift off. We’ll go down and watch football practice	If you want to be successful, go out and work for it. If not, just relax." He yawned. "Come on, let's go. We'll go watch football practice.

Amory gradually accepted this point of view, decided that next fall would inaugurate his career, and relinquished himself to watching Kerry extract joy from 12 Univee. They filled the Jewish youth’s bed with lemon pie; they put out the gas all over the house every night by blowing into the jet in Amory’s room, to the bewilderment of Mrs. Twelve and the local plumber; they set up the effects of the plebeian drunks—pictures, books, and furniture—in the bathroom, to the confusion of the pair, who hazily discovered the transposition on their return from a Trenton spree; they were disappointed beyond measure when the plebeian drunks decided to take it as a joke; they played red-dog and twenty-one and jackpot from dinner to dawn, and on the occasion of one man’s birthday persuaded him to buy sufficient champagne for a hilarious celebration. The donor of the party having remained sober, Kerry and Amory accidentally dropped him down two flights of stairs and called, shamefaced and penitent, at the infirmary all the following week	Amory started to agree with this idea, figured he'd start his real life next fall, and just watched Kerry and his friends have fun at 12 Univee. They filled a Jewish kid's bed with lemon pie. They turned off the gas in the whole house every night by blowing into the gas jet in Amory’s room, which confused Mrs. Twelve and the plumber. They moved all the stuff from some drunk guys’ room – pictures, books, furniture – into the bathroom, which really confused the drunk guys when they got back from a wild night out in Trenton. The pranksters were super bummed when the drunks just laughed it off. They played poker and blackjack all night long. One guy's birthday, they talked him into buying a ton of champagne for a crazy party. Since the birthday boy stayed sober, Kerry and Amory accidentally pushed him down the stairs. Feeling super guilty, they visited him at the hospital every day the next week.

“Say, who are all these women?” demanded Kerry one day, protesting at the size of Amory’s mail. “I’ve been looking at the postmarks lately—Farmington and Dobbs and Westover and Dana Hall—what’s the idea?” Amory grinned. “All from the Twin Cities.” He named them off	"Hey, who are all these women?" Kerry asked one day, annoyed by how much mail Amory was getting. "I've been checking the postmarks—Farmington, Dobbs, Westover, Dana Hall—what's going on?" Amory smiled. "They're all from Minneapolis and St. Paul." He started listing their names.

“There’s Marylyn De Witt—she’s pretty, got a car of her own and that’s damn convenient; there’s Sally Weatherby—she’s getting too fat; there’s Myra St. Claire, she’s an old flame, easy to kiss if you like it—” “What line do you throw ’em?” demanded Kerry. “I’ve tried everything, and the mad wags aren’t even afraid of me.” “You’re the ‘nice boy’ type,” suggested Amory	"There's Marylyn De Witt—she's cute, has her own car, which is super handy. There's Sally Weatherby—she's gaining weight. And Myra St. Claire is an ex—easy to kiss if you're into that." "So, what do you say to them?" Kerry asked. "I've tried everything, and the girls aren't even scared of me anymore." "You seem like the 'good guy' type," Amory said.

“That’s just it. Mother always feels the girl is safe if she’s with me. Honestly, it’s annoying	"That's the problem. My mom always thinks a girl's okay if she's with me. It's honestly a pain."

If I start to hold somebody’s hand, they laugh at me, and let me, just as if it wasn’t part of them. As soon as I get hold of a hand they sort of disconnect it from the rest of them.” “Sulk,” suggested Amory	If I try to hold someone's hand, they laugh and let me, like it's not connected to them. As soon as I grab their hand, they act like it's not even part of their body.” "Pout," Amory said.

“Tell ’em you’re wild and have ’em reform you—go home furious—come back in half an hour—startle ’em.” Kerry shook his head. “No chance. I wrote a St. Timothy girl a really loving letter last year.	"Tell them you're a rebel and let them try to fix you. Go home angry, come back soon after, and shock them." Kerry shook his head. "No way. I wrote a girl from St. Timothy's a seriously romantic letter last year."

In one place I got rattled and said: ‘My God, how I love you!’ She took a nail scissors, clipped out the ‘My God’ and showed the rest of the letter all over school. Doesn’t work at all. I’m just ‘good old Kerry’ and all that rot	I freaked out once and told her, "God, I love you!" She cut out the "God" part with nail scissors and showed the rest of my letter to everyone at school. It totally backfired. Now I'm just "good old Kerry," and that's it.

Amory smiled and tried to picture himself as “good old Amory.” He failed completely. February dripped snow and rain, the cyclonic freshman mid-years passed, and life in 12 Univee continued interesting if not purposeful. Once a day Amory indulged in a club sandwich, cornflakes, and Julienne potatoes at Joe’s, accompanied usually by Kerry or Alec Connage	Amory smiled, trying to imagine being seen as just a regular, dependable guy, "good old Amory." But he couldn't. February was a wet, snowy mess. The tough freshman exams were over. Life in his dorm room, 12 University Hall, was still interesting, even if it didn't have a clear direction. Once a day, Amory would treat himself to a club sandwich, cornflakes, and french-fried potatoes at Joe's, usually with Kerry or Alec Connage.

The latter was a quiet, rather aloof slicker from Hotchkiss, who lived next door and shared the same enforced singleness as Amory, due to the fact that his entire class had gone to Yale. Joe’s was unaesthetic and faintly unsanitary, but a limitless charge account could be opened there, a convenience that Amory appreciated. His father had been experimenting with mining stocks and, in consequence, his allowance, while liberal, was not at all what he had expected	The second guy, a smooth operator from Hotchkiss, was quiet and kept to himself. He lived nearby and, like Amory, was also alone because his whole class had gone to Yale. Joe's place wasn't pretty or very clean, but you could get anything on credit there, which Amory liked. His dad was playing around with mining stocks, so his allowance, while generous, wasn't as big as he'd hoped.

Joe’s had the additional advantage of seclusion from curious upper-class eyes, so at four each afternoon Amory, accompanied by friend or book, went up to experiment with his digestion. One day in March, finding that all the tables were occupied, he slipped into a chair opposite a freshman who bent intently over a book at the last table. They nodded briefly. For twenty minutes Amory sat consuming bacon buns and reading Mrs. Warren’s Profession (he had discovered Shaw quite by accident while browsing in the library during mid-years); the other freshman, also intent on his volume, meanwhile did away with a trio of chocolate malted milks. By and by Amory’s eyes wandered curiously to his fellow-luncher’s book. He spelled out the name and title upside down—Marpessa, by Stephen Phillips	Joe's was private, away from rich people's stares. So every afternoon at four, Amory would go there with a friend or a book to help his stomach feel better. One day in March, all the tables were full, so he sat across from a freshman who was really focused on his book. They just nodded to each other quickly. Amory ate bacon buns and read "Mrs. Warren's Profession" (he'd found Shaw by chance in the library). The other freshman drank three chocolate milkshakes. After a while, Amory got curious and looked at the other guy's book. He read the title upside down: "Marpessa" by Stephen Phillips.

This meant nothing to him, his metrical education having been confined to such Sunday classics as Come Into the Garden, Maude, and what morsels of Shakespeare and Milton had been recently forced upon him. Moved to address his vis-à-vis, he simulated interest in his book for a moment, and then exclaimed aloud as if involuntarily: “Ha! Great stuff!” The other freshman looked up and Amory registered artificial embarrassment. “Are you referring to your bacon buns?” His cracked, kindly voice went well with the large spectacles and the impression of a voluminous keenness that he gave	He didn't care about poetry. He'd only read simple, old-fashioned poems and whatever Shakespeare and Milton he was recently made to read in class. Wanting to talk to the guy across from him, he pretended to read his book for a second, then suddenly said loudly, like he couldn't help it, "Wow! This is great!" The other new student looked up, and Amory acted like he was embarrassed. "Are you talking about your snacks?" The other guy's raspy, friendly voice matched his big glasses and the feeling that he was really smart.

“No,” Amory answered. “I was referring to Bernard Shaw.” He turned the book around in explanation	"No," Amory replied. "I was talking about Bernard Shaw." He showed the book to explain what he meant.

“I’ve never read any Shaw. I’ve always meant to.” The boy paused and then continued: “Did you ever read Stephen Phillips, or do you like poetry?” “Yes, indeed,” Amory affirmed eagerly. “I’ve never read much of Phillips, though	"I haven't read any Shaw. I always meant to." The boy stopped for a second and then asked, "Have you ever read Stephen Phillips, or do you like poetry?" "Definitely," Amory replied, excited. "I haven't read a lot of Phillips, though."

(He had never heard of any Phillips except the late David Graham.) “It’s pretty fair, I think	(He only knew of one Phillips, the dead writer David Graham.) "It's okay, I guess."

Of course he’s a Victorian.” They sallied into a discussion of poetry, in the course of which they introduced themselves, and Amory’s companion proved to be none other than “that awful highbrow, Thomas Parke D’Invilliers,” who signed the passionate love-poems in the Lit. He was, perhaps, nineteen, with stooped shoulders, pale blue eyes, and, as Amory could tell from his general appearance, without much conception of social competition and such phenomena of absorbing interest	"Yeah, he's so old-fashioned." They started talking about poetry, introducing themselves in the process. Amory discovered his companion was "that pretentious snob, Thomas Parke D’Invilliers," the guy who wrote those intense love poems in the college magazine. He looked about nineteen, slouched, with light blue eyes, and, judging by his appearance, didn't care much about fitting in or social climbing.

Still, he liked books, and it seemed forever since Amory had met anyone who did; if only that St. Paul’s crowd at the next table would not mistake him for a bird, too, he would enjoy the encounter tremendously. They didn’t seem to be noticing, so he let himself go, discussed books by the dozens—books he had read, read about, books he had never heard of, rattling off lists of titles with the facility of a Brentano’s clerk. D’Invilliers was partially taken in and wholly delighted	He still loved books, and it felt like forever since Amory had met someone else who did. He'd really enjoy talking to this guy, if only the St. Paul's group at the next table wouldn't think he was weird too. They didn't seem to be paying attention, so he relaxed and started talking about tons of books—books he'd read, books he'd heard about, even books he didn't know. He was throwing out titles like he worked at a bookstore. D'Invilliers was partly convinced and completely entertained.

In a good-natured way he had almost decided that Princeton was one part deadly Philistines and one part deadly grinds, and to find a person who could mention Keats without stammering, yet evidently washed his hands, was rather a treat. “Ever read any Oscar Wilde?” he asked	He'd jokingly concluded Princeton was full of boring squares and hard-core nerds. Finding someone who could talk about Keats comfortably and also seemed hygienic was a pleasant surprise. "Ever read any Oscar Wilde?" he asked.

“No. Who wrote it?” “It’s a man—don’t you know?” “Oh, surely.” A faint chord was struck in Amory’s memory. “Wasn’t the comic opera, Patience, written about him?” “Yes, that’s the fella	"No. Who wrote it?" "It's a guy—you don't know?" "Oh, really." Amory vaguely remembered something. "Wasn't the comic opera, *Patience*, based on him?" "Yeah, that's the guy."

I’ve just finished a book of his, The Picture of Dorian Gray, and I certainly wish you’d read it. You’d like it	I just finished reading "The Picture of Dorian Gray" by him, and I really think you should read it. You'd enjoy it.

You can borrow it if you want to.” “Why, I’d like it a lot—thanks.” “Don’t you want to come up to the room? I’ve got a few other books.” Amory hesitated, glanced at the St. Paul’s group—one of them was the magnificent, exquisite Humbird—and he considered how determinate the addition of this friend would be.	"You can use it if you want." "Oh, I'd really like that, thanks." "Want to come up to my room? I have some other books." Amory paused, looked at the group from St. Paul's - Humbird, who was super cool, was there - and thought about how much bringing this new friend along would change things.

He never got to the stage of making them and getting rid of them—he was not hard enough for that—so he measured Thomas Parke D’Invilliers’ undoubted attractions and value against the menace of cold eyes behind tortoise-rimmed spectacles that he fancied glared from the next table. “Yes, I’ll go.” So he found Dorian Gray and the Mystic and Somber Dolores and the Belle Dame sans Merci; for a month was keen on naught else	He never reached the point of using people and discarding them—he wasn't tough enough. Instead, he weighed Thomas Parke D’Invilliers’ good qualities against the possibility of getting judged harshly by someone with cold eyes behind glasses, who he imagined was glaring at him from the nearby table. “Okay, I’ll go.” That’s how he discovered *Dorian Gray*, the mystical and sad Dolores, and the heartless beauty; for a whole month, he wasn't interested in anything else.

The world became pale and interesting, and he tried hard to look at Princeton through the satiated eyes of Oscar Wilde and Swinburne—or “Fingal O’Flaherty” and “Algernon Charles,” as he called them in précieuse jest. He read enormously every night—Shaw, Chesterton, Barrie, Pinero, Yeats, Synge, Ernest Dowson, Arthur Symons, Keats, Sudermann, Robert Hugh Benson, the Savoy Operas—just a heterogeneous mixture, for he suddenly discovered that he had read nothing for years. Tom D’Invilliers became at first an occasion rather than a friend. Amory saw him about once a week, and together they gilded the ceiling of Tom’s room and decorated the walls with imitation tapestry, bought at an auction, tall candlesticks and figured curtains	Life seemed muted but intriguing, and he tried to see Princeton with the jaded perspective of Oscar Wilde and Swinburne ("Fingal O'Flaherty" and "Algernon Charles," as he jokingly called them in a fancy way). He devoured books every night—Shaw, Chesterton, Barrie, Pinero, Yeats, Synge, Ernest Dowson, Arthur Symons, Keats, Sudermann, Robert Hugh Benson, the Savoy Operas—just a random mix, because he realized he hadn't really read anything in ages. At first, Tom D’Invilliers was more of something to do than a true friend. Amory saw him about once a week, and together they decorated Tom’s room with gold paint on the ceiling, fake tapestries from an auction, tall candlesticks, and patterned curtains.

Amory liked him for being clever and literary without effeminacy or affectation. In fact, Amory did most of the strutting and tried painfully to make every remark an epigram, than which, if one is content with ostensible epigrams, there are many feats harder. 12 Univee was amused	Amory liked him because he was smart and into books, but not in a way that felt fake or showy. Actually, Amory was the one who acted cocky and tried way too hard to make everything he said sound like a witty one-liner. It's much harder to *actually* be witty than just trying to *look* witty. 12 Univee found it funny.

Kerry read Dorian Gray and simulated Lord Henry, following Amory about, addressing him as “Dorian” and pretending to encourage in him wicked fancies and attenuated tendencies to ennui. When he carried it into Commons, to the amazement of the others at table, Amory became furiously embarrassed, and after that made epigrams only before D’Invilliers or a convenient mirror. One day Tom and Amory tried reciting their own and Lord Dunsany’s poems to the music of Kerry’s graphophone. “Chant!” cried Tom	Kerry read "Dorian Gray" and acted like Lord Henry. He followed Amory around, calling him "Dorian" and jokingly pushing him to be cynical and bored. When he did this in the dining hall, embarrassing Amory in front of everyone, Amory stopped making witty remarks except when he was with D’Invilliers or by himself. One day, Tom and Amory tried reciting their poems, and poems by Lord Dunsany, while Kerry played music on his record player. "Chant!" Tom yelled.

“Don’t recite! Chant!” Amory, who was performing, looked annoyed, and claimed that he needed a record with less piano in it. Kerry thereupon rolled on the floor in stifled laughter. “Put on ‘Hearts and Flowers’!” he howled. “Oh, my Lord, I’m going to cast a kitten	"Don't just read it, sing it!" Amory, who was singing, looked bothered and said he needed a record with less piano. Then Kerry fell to the floor, laughing quietly. "Play 'Hearts and Flowers'!" he yelled. "Oh my God, I can't stop laughing!"

“Shut off the damn graphophone,” Amory cried, rather red in the face. “I’m not giving an exhibition.” In the meanwhile Amory delicately kept trying to awaken a sense of the social system in D’Invilliers, for he knew that this poet was really more conventional than he, and needed merely watered hair, a smaller range of conversation, and a darker brown hat to become quite regular	"Turn off that stupid record player," Amory said, getting a little flushed. "I'm not putting on a show." All the while, Amory was carefully trying to get D'Invilliers to understand how society works, because he knew the poet was actually more traditional than himself. He just needed less flashy hair, simpler conversations, and a more ordinary hat to fit right in.

But the liturgy of Livingstone collars and dark ties fell on heedless ears; in fact D’Invilliers faintly resented his efforts; so Amory confined himself to calls once a week, and brought him occasionally to 12 Univee. This caused mild titters among the other freshmen, who called them “Doctor Johnson and Boswell.” Alec Connage, another frequent visitor, liked him in a vague way, but was afraid of him as a highbrow. Kerry, who saw through his poetic patter to the solid, almost respectable depths within, was immensely amused and would have him recite poetry by the hour, while he lay with closed eyes on Amory’s sofa and listened: “Asleep or waking is it? for her neck Kissed over close, wears yet a purple speck Wherein the pained blood falters and goes out; Soft and stung softly—fairer for a fleck	No one cared about D'Invilliers dressing like a clergyman with his stiff collars and dark ties. D'Invilliers even seemed annoyed by Amory's attempts to connect. So Amory only visited him once a week and sometimes took him to 12 University Place. This made the other freshmen laugh, and they nicknamed them "Doctor Johnson and Boswell." Alec Connage, another regular visitor, liked D'Invilliers, but was also intimidated by his intelligence. Kerry saw past D'Invilliers' fancy poetry and recognized his serious, almost conventional side. Kerry found this hilarious and would make him recite poetry for hours while he relaxed on Amory's couch with his eyes closed, listening.

“That’s good,” Kerry would say softly. “It pleases the elder Holiday. That’s a great poet, I guess	"Okay, that's cool," Kerry would say quietly. "It makes the old man Holiday happy. I guess he's a really good poet."

Tom, delighted at an audience, would ramble through the Poems and Ballades until Kerry and Amory knew them almost as well as he. Amory took to writing poetry on spring afternoons, in the gardens of the big estates near Princeton, while swans made effective atmosphere in the artificial pools, and slow clouds sailed harmoniously above the willows. May came too soon, and suddenly unable to bear walls, he wandered the campus at all hours through starlight and rain	Tom loved having people listen to him and would go on and on about poems and ballads until Kerry and Amory knew them practically by heart. Amory started writing his own poetry on spring afternoons in the gardens of those fancy houses near Princeton. Swans in the fake ponds and slow-moving clouds over the willow trees made the whole scene feel really poetic. May arrived quickly, and feeling trapped indoors, he walked around campus at all hours, whether it was starry or raining.

The night mist fell. From the moon it rolled, clustered about the spires and towers, and then settled below them, so that the dreaming peaks were still in lofty aspiration toward the sky	The night got misty. The mist came from the moon, swirling around the tall buildings. Then it dropped lower, leaving the high points still reaching for the sky.

Figures that dotted the day like ants now brushed along as shadowy ghosts, in and out of the foreground. The Gothic halls and cloisters were infinitely more mysterious as they loomed suddenly out of the darkness, outlined each by myriad faint squares of yellow light	People who had been visible all day now moved like shadowy ghosts, drifting in and out of sight. The old buildings looked even more mysterious as they appeared out of the darkness, each one lit by countless small squares of light.

Indefinitely from somewhere a bell boomed the quarter-hour, and Amory, pausing by the sundial, stretched himself out full length on the damp grass. The cool bathed his eyes and slowed the flight of time—time that had crept so insidiously through the lazy April afternoons, seemed so intangible in the long spring twilights. Evening after evening the senior singing had drifted over the campus in melancholy beauty, and through the shell of his undergraduate consciousness had broken a deep and reverent devotion to the gray walls and Gothic peaks and all they symbolized as warehouses of dead ages. The tower that in view of his window sprang upward, grew into a spire, yearning higher until its uppermost tip was half invisible against the morning skies, gave him the first sense of the transiency and unimportance of the campus figures except as holders of the apostolic succession	From somewhere, a bell rang the quarter-hour. Amory stopped by the sundial, then lay down on the wet grass. The coolness felt good on his eyes and made time slow down. Time had passed so quietly during the slow April afternoons and felt so unreal during the long spring evenings. Every evening, the senior choir's singing floated across the campus, beautiful but sad. This made him, as a college student, deeply respect the old buildings, their Gothic architecture, and everything they represented as places holding onto the past. The tower he could see from his window, reaching up like a spire towards the sky until the top almost disappeared, made him realize that the people on campus weren't important except as links to tradition.

He liked knowing that Gothic architecture, with its upward trend, was peculiarly appropriate to universities, and the idea became personal to him. The silent stretches of green, the quiet halls with an occasional late-burning scholastic light held his imagination in a strong grasp, and the chastity of the spire became a symbol of this perception	He felt a connection to universities because of their Gothic buildings that reach towards the sky. The idea of the architecture became important to him personally. The peaceful green spaces and quiet buildings, with a single light burning late, captivated him. The pure, clean lines of the church spire symbolized this feeling.

“Damn it all,” he whispered aloud, wetting his hands in the damp and running them through his hair. “Next year I work!” Yet he knew that where now the spirit of spires and towers made him dreamily acquiescent, it would then overawe him. Where now he realized only his own inconsequence, effort would make him aware of his own impotency and insufficiency	"Damn it," he muttered, running his wet hands through his hair. "Next year, I'm getting a job!" But he knew that the inspiring feeling he got from the university would then overwhelm him. Right now, he only felt insignificant, but working would just make him feel useless and inadequate.

The college dreamed on—awake. He felt a nervous excitement that might have been the very throb of its slow heart	The college was like a living thing, even while everyone was going about their day. He felt a jittery excitement, like he could feel the college's pulse, slow and steady.

It was a stream where he was to throw a stone whose faint ripple would be vanishing almost as it left his hand. As yet he had given nothing, he had taken nothing	It felt like he was about to make a small, insignificant impact that would disappear almost immediately. He hadn't contributed anything yet, and he hadn't gained anything either.

A belated freshman, his oilskin slicker rasping loudly, slushed along the soft path. A voice from somewhere called the inevitable formula, “Stick out your head!” below an unseen window. A hundred little sounds of the current drifting on under the fog pressed in finally on his consciousness	Late to the party as a freshman, his raincoat making a loud noise, he walked through the slushy path. Someone yelled the same old joke, "Show yourself!" from a hidden window. Eventually, he noticed all the little sounds of the water flowing under the fog.

“Oh, God!” he cried suddenly, and started at the sound of his voice in the stillness. The rain dripped on. A minute longer he lay without moving, his hands clinched. Then he sprang to his feet and gave his clothes a tentative pat	"Oh God!" he yelled, surprised to hear himself in the quiet. The rain kept falling. He stayed still for another minute, hands clenched tight. Then he jumped up and brushed off his clothes.

“I’m very damn wet!” he said aloud to the sundial.	"I'm really soaked!" he said to the sundial.

The war began in the summer following his freshman year. Beyond a sporting interest in the German dash for Paris the whole affair failed either to thrill or interest him. With the attitude he might have held toward an amusing melodrama he hoped it would be long and bloody	The summer after his first year of college, the war started. He was mildly curious about Germany's push towards Paris, but overall, the war didn't excite him. He viewed it like a dramatic movie and hoped it would be a long and violent one.

If it had not continued he would have felt like an irate ticket-holder at a prizefight where the principals refused to mix it up. That was his total reaction.	If it had stopped there, he would have felt like an angry fan at a boxing match where the fighters wouldn't actually fight. That's all he felt.

“All right, ponies!” “Shake it up!” “Hey, ponies—how about easing up on that crap game and shaking a mean hip?” “Hey, ponies!” The coach fumed helplessly, the Triangle Club president, glowering with anxiety, varied between furious bursts of authority and fits of temperamental lassitude, when he sat spiritless and wondered how the devil the show was ever going on tour by Christmas. “All right	“Okay, everyone!” “Let's get moving!” “Hey, guys—can you take a break from that card game and actually dance?” “Hey, everyone!” The coach was getting really frustrated. The president of the Triangle Club, looking worried, kept switching between yelling orders and just being totally exhausted. He'd sit there, completely discouraged, wondering how they’d ever get the show ready to tour by Christmas. “Okay,

We’ll take the pirate song.” The ponies took last drags at their cigarettes and slumped into place; the leading lady rushed into the foreground, setting his hands and feet in an atmospheric mince; and as the coach clapped and stamped and tumped and da-da’d, they hashed out a dance. A great, seething anthill was the Triangle Club	"Let's do the pirate song." The chorus girls finished their cigarettes and got into position. The star dancer hurried to the front, moving his hands and feet in a fancy, showy way. As the music played loudly and with a strong beat, they quickly threw together a dance. The Triangle Club was a chaotic, bustling place.

It gave a musical comedy every year, travelling with cast, chorus, orchestra, and scenery all through Christmas vacation. The play and music were the work of undergraduates, and the club itself was the most influential of institutions, over three hundred men competing for it every year. Amory, after an easy victory in the first sophomore Princetonian competition, stepped into a vacancy of the cast as Boiling Oil, a Pirate Lieutenant	Every year, they put on a musical comedy. The whole show – actors, singers, band, and sets – went on tour during Christmas break. Students wrote the play and music. The club that put it on was super popular; over 300 guys tried out each year. Amory easily won a spot on the school newspaper in his second year and then got a role in the show as Boiling Oil, a pirate officer.

Every night for the last week they had rehearsed Ha-Ha Hortense! in the Casino, from two in the afternoon until eight in the morning, sustained by dark and powerful coffee, and sleeping in lectures through the interim. A rare scene, the Casino	For the past week, they practiced the play "Ha-Ha Hortense!" at the Casino every night. They worked from 2 PM until 8 AM, fueled by strong, dark coffee, and then slept through their classes during the day. The Casino was a strange sight.

A big, barnlike auditorium, dotted with boys as girls, boys as pirates, boys as babies; the scenery in course of being violently set up; the spotlight man rehearsing by throwing weird shafts into angry eyes; over all the constant tuning of the orchestra or the cheerful tumpty-tump of a Triangle tune. The boy who writes the lyrics stands in the corner, biting a pencil, with twenty minutes to think of an encore; the business manager argues with the secretary as to how much money can be spent on “those damn milkmaid costumes”; the old graduate, president in ninety-eight, perches on a box and thinks how much simpler it was in his day. How a Triangle show ever got off was a mystery, but it was a riotous mystery, anyway, whether or not one did enough service to wear a little gold Triangle on his watch-chain. Ha-Ha Hortense! was written over six times and had the names of nine collaborators on the programme	A huge auditorium was filled with guys dressed as girls, pirates, and babies. Stagehands were frantically setting up the scenery. The spotlight operator practiced by shining harsh beams into annoyed eyes. The orchestra was constantly tuning their instruments, or someone cheerfully played a simple tune on a triangle. The lyricist stood in the corner, chewing on a pencil, trying to come up with an encore in just twenty minutes. The business manager and secretary argued about how much money they could spend on the "damn milkmaid costumes." An older alumnus, class of '98, sat on a box, thinking about how much easier things were back then. It was a miracle how a Triangle show ever came together, but it was a crazy, chaotic miracle, regardless of whether you contributed enough to earn a small gold Triangle for your watch chain. "Ha-Ha Hortense!" had been rewritten six times and had nine writers listed in the program.

All Triangle shows started by being “something different—not just a regular musical comedy,” but when the several authors, the president, the coach and the faculty committee finished with it, there remained just the old reliable Triangle show with the old reliable jokes and the star comedian who got expelled or sick or something just before the trip, and the dark-whiskered man in the pony-ballet, who “absolutely won’t shave twice a day, doggone it!” There was one brilliant place in Ha-Ha Hortense! It is a Princeton tradition that whenever a Yale man who is a member of the widely advertised Skull and Bones hears the sacred name mentioned, he must leave the room. It is also a tradition that the members are invariably successful in later life, amassing fortunes or votes or coupons or whatever they choose to amass. Therefore, at each performance of Ha-Ha Hortense! half-a-dozen seats were kept from sale and occupied by six of the worst-looking vagabonds that could be hired from the streets, further touched up by the Triangle makeup man	Triangle shows always aimed to be "unique," not just another typical musical. But after too many people got involved – the writers, the school president, the coach, and a faculty group – they always ended up being the same old Triangle show. Same old jokes, same star comedian who always had a problem right before the tour (got kicked out, got sick, something like that), and the hairy guy in the pony ballet who refused to shave twice a day, no matter what! There was one clever bit in "Ha-Ha Hortense!" It's a Princeton thing that whenever a Yale guy from Skull and Bones hears that name, he has to leave the room. The rumor is those guys always become successful, raking in money, votes, whatever they want. So, at every show of "Ha-Ha Hortense!", they kept six seats empty and filled them with the ugliest homeless people they could find and made them even worse with makeup.

At the moment in the show where Firebrand, the Pirate Chief, pointed at his black flag and said, “I am a Yale graduate—note my Skull and Bones!”—at this very moment the six vagabonds were instructed to rise conspicuously and leave the theatre with looks of deep melancholy and an injured dignity. It was claimed though never proved that on one occasion the hired Elis were swelled by one of the real thing. They played through vacation to the fashionable of eight cities. Amory liked Louisville and Memphis best: these knew how to meet strangers, furnished extraordinary punch, and flaunted an astonishing array of feminine beauty	When the pirate captain in the play, Firebrand, showed off his pirate flag and joked, "I went to Yale—check out my Skull and Bones!" that's when the six guys paid to be troublemakers were supposed to get up and walk out of the theater looking really sad and offended. People said that once, one of the actual Yale students joined them, but no one could ever prove it. The group performed during breaks in eight cities for rich people. Amory liked Louisville and Memphis the most. Those cities were welcoming to outsiders, had amazing parties, and a lot of beautiful women.

Chicago he approved for a certain verve that transcended its loud accent—however, it was a Yale town, and as the Yale Glee Club was expected in a week the Triangle received only divided homage. In Baltimore, Princeton was at home, and everyone fell in love	He liked Chicago because it had a cool energy that made up for its rough edges. But it was a Yale kind of place, and since the Yale Glee Club was coming soon, the Triangle Club (probably a Princeton club) wasn't getting much attention. In Baltimore, Princeton was the favorite, and everyone was smitten.

There was a proper consumption of strong waters all along the line; one man invariably went on the stage highly stimulated, claiming that his particular interpretation of the part required it. There were three private cars; however, no one slept except in the third car, which was called the “animal car,” and where were herded the spectacled windjammers of the orchestra. Everything was so hurried that there was no time to be bored, but when they arrived in Philadelphia, with vacation nearly over, there was rest in getting out of the heavy atmosphere of flowers and greasepaint, and the ponies took off their corsets with abdominal pains and sighs of relief. When the disbanding came, Amory set out post haste for Minneapolis, for Sally Weatherby’s cousin, Isabelle Borgé, was coming to spend the winter in Minneapolis while her parents went abroad	Everyone was drinking a lot of alcohol. One actor always got drunk before going on stage, saying his acting needed it. They had three private train cars, but everyone slept in the third one, nicknamed the "animal car," where the nerdy orchestra members were crammed together. Everything was so rushed that nobody had time to be bored. But when they got to Philadelphia, with their break almost over, it was a relief to escape the heavy smell of flowers and makeup. The dancers took off their corsets, breathing sighs of relief and complaining about stomach aches. When the group split up, Amory rushed to Minneapolis because Sally Weatherby's cousin, Isabelle Borgé, was going to spend the winter there while her parents traveled overseas.

He remembered Isabelle only as a little girl with whom he had played sometimes when he first went to Minneapolis. She had gone to Baltimore to live—but since then she had developed a past. Amory was in full stride, confident, nervous, and jubilant. Scurrying back to Minneapolis to see a girl he had known as a child seemed the interesting and romantic thing to do, so without compunction he wired his mother not to expect him	He just remembered Isabelle as a kid he used to play with when he first moved to Minneapolis. She'd moved to Baltimore, and apparently had some life experiences since then. Amory was feeling good, confident, a little anxious, and excited. The idea of rushing back to Minneapolis to see a girl he'd known when he was a child seemed interesting and romantic, so he wired his mother without a second thought, telling her he wouldn't be coming.

sat in the train, and thought about himself for thirty-six hours.	He was on the train for thirty-six hours, just thinking about himself.

On the Triangle trip Amory had come into constant contact with that great current American phenomenon, the “petting party.” None of the Victorian mothers—and most of the mothers were Victorian—had any idea how casually their daughters were accustomed to be kissed. “Servant-girls are that way,” says Mrs. Huston-Carmelite to her popular daughter	During the Triangle trip, Amory kept running into "petting parties," which were a big thing in America then. Most of the moms (who were old-fashioned) had no clue how easily their daughters got kissed. Mrs. Huston-Carmelite said to her popular daughter, "Only maids act like that."

“They are kissed first and proposed to afterward.” But the Popular Daughter becomes engaged every six months between sixteen and twenty-two, when she arranges a match with young Hambell, of Cambell & Hambell, who fatuously considers himself her first love, and between engagements the P.D	"They get kissed before they get proposed to." The Popular Daughter gets engaged like clockwork every six months from sixteen to twenty-two. Then, she ends up marrying young Hambell, from Cambell & Hambell. He's cluelessly convinced he's her first true love. And in between all those engagements, the P.D...

(she is selected by the cut-in system at dances, which favors the survival of the fittest) has other sentimental last kisses in the moonlight, or the firelight, or the outer darkness. Amory saw girls doing things that even in his memory would have been impossible: eating three-o’clock, after-dance suppers in impossible cafés, talking of every side of life with an air half of earnestness, half of mockery, yet with a furtive excitement that Amory considered stood for a real moral letdown. But he never realized how widespread it was until he saw the cities between New York and Chicago as one vast juvenile intrigue	She, being chosen by guys cutting in on dances (where only the most popular girls survive), still finds time for romantic late-night kisses by the moon, fire, or in some dark corner. Amory watched girls behaving in ways that seemed crazy even compared to recent memory: eating late-night meals after dances in awful restaurants, discussing all aspects of life with a mix of seriousness and sarcasm, but with a hidden thrill that Amory thought showed a real decline in morals. But he didn't understand how common it was until he saw the cities between New York and Chicago as one giant teenage drama.

Afternoon at the Plaza, with winter twilight hovering outside and faint drums downstairs. they strut and fret in the lobby, taking another cocktail, scrupulously attired and waiting. Then the swinging doors revolve and three bundles of fur mince in. The theatre comes afterward; then a table at the Midnight Frolic—of course, mother will be along there, but she will serve only to make things more secretive and brilliant as she sits in solitary state at the deserted table and thinks such entertainments as this are not half so bad as they are painted, only rather wearying	It's afternoon at the Plaza Hotel. Outside, it's getting dark and you can hear faint drums from below. People are showing off in the lobby, getting another drink, dressed perfectly, waiting. The doors spin and three women in fur coats walk in, acting coy. They'll go to the theater later, then to the Midnight Frolic club. Of course, one of their mothers will be there, but she'll just make everything seem more exciting and secretive as she sits alone at a table, thinking these parties aren't as bad as people say, just tiring.

But the P.D. is in love again. it was odd, wasn’t it?—that though there was so much room left in the taxi the P.D. and the boy from Williams were somehow crowded out and had to go in a separate car	But the professor is in love again. Weird, right? Even though there was plenty of space in the taxi, the professor and the Williams guy were kind of pushed aside and had to take another car.

Odd! Didn’t you notice how flushed the P.D. was when she arrived just seven minutes late? But the P.D. “gets away with it	That's weird! Did you see how embarrassed Paula Dickinson was when she showed up only seven minutes late? But she usually gets away with being late.

The “belle” had become the “flirt,” the “flirt” had become the “baby vamp.” The “belle” had five or six callers every afternoon. If the P.D., by some strange accident, has two, it is made pretty uncomfortable for the one who hasn’t a date with her. The “belle” was surrounded by a dozen men in the intermissions between dances. Try to find the P.D. between dances, just try to find her. The same girl	The popular girl used to be charming, then she became a flirt, and now she's overly seductive. Back then, the charming girl had a bunch of guys visiting her every day. Now, if the overly seductive girl even has two guys interested, it's awkward for the one who's not on a date with her. The charming girl was always with a crowd of guys between dances. But try finding the overly seductive girl between dances – good luck. It's the same girl.

deep in an atmosphere of jungle music and the questioning of moral codes. Amory found it rather fascinating to feel that any popular girl he met before eight he might quite possibly kiss before twelve. “Why on earth are we here?” he asked the girl with the green combs one night as they sat in someone’s limousine, outside the Country Club in Louisville. “I don’t know	Lost in the loud music and discussions about what's right and wrong, Amory thought it was cool that he could kiss any girl he met early in the evening before midnight. "Seriously, why are we even here?" he asked the girl with the green hair clips one night, sitting in a limo outside the Louisville Country Club. "I have no idea."

I’m just full of the devil.” “Let’s be frank—we’ll never see each other again	"I'm feeling really mischievous." "Let's be honest—we're never going to see each other again."

I wanted to come out here with you because I thought you were the best-looking girl in sight. You really don’t care whether you ever see me again, do you?” “No—but is this your line for every girl? What have I done to deserve it?” “And you didn’t feel tired dancing or want a cigarette or any of the things you said? You just wanted to be—” “Oh, let’s go in,” she interrupted, “if you want to analyze. Let’s not talk about it	"I came out here with you because I thought you were the prettiest girl here. You don't really care if you ever see me again, right?" "No, but is that what you say to every girl? What did I do to make you say that?" "And you weren't tired from dancing, or want a cigarette, or anything you said? You just wanted to be—" "Oh, let's go back inside," she cut in, "if you want to overthink things. Let's not talk about it."

When the hand-knit, sleeveless jerseys were stylish, Amory, in a burst of inspiration, named them “petting shirts.” The name travelled from coast to coast on the lips of parlor-snakes and P	Back when those sleeveless, hand-knitted sweaters were cool, Amory, in a moment of genius, called them "petting shirts." The name spread everywhere, talked about by gossips and...

Amory was now eighteen years old, just under six feet tall and exceptionally, but not conventionally, handsome. He had rather a young face, the ingenuousness of which was marred by the penetrating green eyes, fringed with long dark eyelashes	Amory was eighteen, almost six feet tall, and really good-looking, but not in a typical way. He looked young, but his innocent face was offset by sharp, green eyes with long, dark lashes.

He lacked somehow that intense animal magnetism that so often accompanies beauty in men or women; his personality seemed rather a mental thing, and it was not in his power to turn it on and off like a water-faucet. But people never forgot his face.	He wasn't naturally attractive like some people are. His appeal was more intellectual, and he couldn't just charm people on command. But everyone remembered him.

She paused at the top of the staircase. The sensations attributed to divers on springboards, leading ladies on opening nights, and lumpy, husky young men on the day of the Big Game, crowded through her. She should have descended to a burst of drums or a discordant blend of themes from Thais and Carmen	She stopped at the top of the stairs. She felt all the nervous excitement of a diver before a jump, an actress on opening night, or a football player before a big game. She imagined going downstairs with a fanfare of drums or music like you'd hear in Thais and Carmen.

She had never been so curious about her appearance, she had never been so satisfied with it. She had been sixteen years old for six months	She was more aware of how she looked than ever before, and she actually liked what she saw. She'd been sixteen for half a year.

“Isabelle!” called her cousin Sally from the doorway of the dressing-room. “I’m ready	"Isabelle!" her cousin Sally yelled from the dressing room door. "I'm ready!"

She caught a slight lump of nervousness in her throat. “I had to send back to the house for another pair of slippers	She felt a little nervous. "I had to have them bring me another pair of shoes from the house."

It’ll be just a minute.” Isabelle started toward the dressing-room for a last peek in the mirror, but something decided her to stand there and gaze down the broad stairs of the Minnehaha Club	"Just a sec," Isabelle said. She started to go to the dressing room for one last look in the mirror, but then she changed her mind and just stood there, looking down the big staircase of the Minnehaha Club.

They curved tantalizingly, and she could catch just a glimpse of two pairs of masculine feet in the hall below. Pump-shod in uniform black, they gave no hint of identity, but she wondered eagerly if one pair were attached to Amory Blaine. This young man, not as yet encountered, had nevertheless taken up a considerable part of her day—the first day of her arrival	Her legs looked really good, and she could just see two guys' feet in the hallway downstairs. They were wearing shiny black dress shoes, so she couldn't tell who they were, but she really hoped one pair belonged to Amory Blaine. She hadn't met him yet, but she'd already spent a lot of time thinking about him—and it was only her first day there.

Coming up in the machine from the station, Sally had volunteered, amid a rain of question, comment, revelation, and exaggeration: “You remember Amory Blaine, of course. Well, he’s simply mad to see you again. He’s stayed over a day from college, and he’s coming tonight	Driving from the train station, Sally burst out, even though everyone was talking and asking questions: "You remember Amory Blaine, right? Well, he *really* wants to see you. He skipped a day of college just to hang out with you tonight."

He’s heard so much about you—says he remembers your eyes.” This had pleased Isabelle. It put them on equal terms, although she was quite capable of staging her own romances, with or without advance advertising. But following her happy tremble of anticipation, came a sinking sensation that made her ask: “How do you mean he’s heard about me? What sort of things?” Sally smiled	"He's heard a lot about you and says he remembers your eyes." Isabelle liked that. It made them even, even though she could totally handle starting her own relationships, with or without help. But after that initial excitement, she felt a little worried and asked, "What do you mean he's heard about me? What has he heard?" Sally smiled.

She felt rather in the capacity of a showman with her more exotic cousin. “He knows you’re—you’re considered beautiful and all that”—she paused—“and I guess he knows you’ve been kissed.” At this Isabelle’s little fist had clinched suddenly under the fur robe	She felt like she was putting her more interesting cousin on display. "He knows people think you're beautiful and everything," she hesitated, "and I guess he knows you've been kissed." Hearing this, Isabelle's small fist tightened under the fur blanket.

She was accustomed to be thus followed by her desperate past, and it never failed to rouse in her the same feeling of resentment; yet—in a strange town it was an advantageous reputation. She was a “Speed,” was she? Well—let them find out. Out of the window Isabelle watched the snow glide by in the frosty morning	She was used to her bad reputation catching up with her, and it always made her angry. Still, in a new place, being known as a "Speed" could be useful. So what if they thought she was fast? Let them figure her out. Isabelle looked out the window at the snow passing by on the cold morning.

It was ever so much colder here than in Baltimore; she had not remembered; the glass of the side door was iced, the windows were shirred with snow in the corners. Her mind played still with one subject. Did he dress like that boy there, who walked calmly down a bustling business street, in moccasins and winter-carnival costume? How very Western! Of course he wasn’t that way: he went to Princeton, was a sophomore or something. Really she had no distinct idea of him	It was way colder here than she remembered from Baltimore. The glass on the side door was covered in ice, and the windows had snow piled up in the corners. She was still thinking about the same thing. Did he dress like that guy walking confidently down the busy street in moccasins and a winter carnival outfit? So Western! Of course, he probably wasn't like that; he went to Princeton. He was a sophomore or something. She really didn't know what he was like.

An ancient snapshot she had preserved in an old kodak book had impressed her by the big eyes (which he had probably grown up to by now). However, in the last month, when her winter visit to Sally had been decided on, he had assumed the proportions of a worthy adversary. Children, most astute of matchmakers, plot their campaigns quickly, and Sally had played a clever correspondence sonata to Isabelle’s excitable temperament. Isabelle had been for some time capable of very strong, if very transient emotions	She remembered a photo from a Kodak album, especially his big eyes (which he probably doesn't have anymore). But recently, since she planned to visit Sally for the winter, she started thinking of him as someone interesting to compete with. Kids are great matchmakers and plan things fast. Sally cleverly wrote letters to get Isabelle excited. Isabelle could feel things deeply, even if those feelings didn't last long.

They drew up at a spreading, white-stone building, set back from the snowy street. Mrs. Weatherby greeted her warmly and her various younger cousins were produced from the corners where they skulked politely. Isabelle met them tactfully. At her best she allied all with whom she came in contact—except older girls and some women	They stopped in front of a large, white stone building that was set back from the snow-covered street. Mrs. Weatherby greeted Isabelle with a warm welcome, and her younger cousins were brought out from where they were quietly hiding. Isabelle was polite and friendly to them. When she was at her best, she could get along with anyone—except older girls and some women.

All the impressions she made were conscious. The half-dozen girls she renewed acquaintance with that morning were all rather impressed and as much by her direct personality as by her reputation. Amory Blaine was an open subject. Evidently a bit light of love, neither popular nor unpopular—every girl there seemed to have had an affair with him at some time or other, but no one volunteered any really useful information	She was very aware of how she came across. The girls she reconnected with that morning were pretty impressed, not just by what they'd heard about her, but by her confidence. Amory Blaine was a hot topic. Apparently, he was a bit of a player, neither super liked nor disliked. It seemed like every girl there had hooked up with him at some point, but no one was giving up any real dirt.

He was going to fall for her. Sally had published that information to her young set and they were retailing it back to Sally as fast as they set eyes on Isabelle	He knew he was going to fall in love with her. Sally had told all her friends, and they were confirming it back to Sally every time they saw Isabelle.

Isabelle resolved secretly that she would, if necessary, force herself to like him—she owed it to Sally. Suppose she were terribly disappointed. Sally had painted him in such glowing colors—he was good-looking, “sort of distinguished, when he wants to be,” had a line, and was properly inconstant. In fact, he summed up all the romance that her age and environment led her to desire	Isabelle decided she'd try really hard to like him, even if she didn't at first, because she felt like she owed it to Sally. What if she ended up really not liking him? Sally had made him sound amazing – good-looking, "kind of special, when he tries," with smooth moves, and not tied down. Basically, he was everything she wanted in a romance at her age and where she lived.

She wondered if those were his dancing-shoes that foxtrotted tentatively around the soft rug below. All impressions and, in fact, all ideas were extremely kaleidoscopic to Isabelle. She had that curious mixture of the social and the artistic temperaments found often in two classes, society women and actresses	She wondered if those were his shoes, moving awkwardly on the rug as if dancing a foxtrot. Isabelle's thoughts and feelings were a jumble. She had that mix of being both social and artistic, like you often see in rich women and actresses.

Her education or, rather, her sophistication, had been absorbed from the boys who had dangled on her favor; her tact was instinctive, and her capacity for love-affairs was limited only by the number of the susceptible within telephone distance. Flirt smiled from her large black-brown eyes and shone through her intense physical magnetism. So she waited at the head of the stairs that evening while slippers were fetched	She wasn't formally educated, but she'd learned a lot from the guys who were chasing her. She was naturally good at dealing with people, and she could only have as many boyfriends as there were guys interested in her nearby. Her eyes and her natural attractiveness made her flirty. That evening, she waited at the top of the stairs while someone got her slippers.

Just as she was growing impatient, Sally came out of the dressing-room, beaming with her accustomed good nature and high spirits, and together they descended to the floor below, while the shifting searchlight of Isabelle’s mind flashed on two ideas: she was glad she had high color tonight, and she wondered if he danced well. Downstairs, in the club’s great room, she was surrounded for a moment by the girls she had met in the afternoon, then she heard Sally’s voice repeating a cycle of names, and found herself bowing to a sextet of black and white, terribly stiff, vaguely familiar figures. The name Blaine figured somewhere, but at first she could not place him	Just as she was getting annoyed, Sally came out of the dressing room, smiling happily as usual. Together, they went downstairs. Isabelle quickly thought: she was happy she looked good tonight, and she hoped he was a good dancer. Downstairs in the club's main room, she was briefly surrounded by the girls she'd met earlier. Then, she heard Sally introducing people, and she found herself nodding to six awkwardly formal guys in tuxedos. She recognized the name "Blaine" but couldn't immediately remember who he was.

A very confused, very juvenile moment of awkward backings and bumpings followed, and everyone found himself talking to the person he least desired to. Isabelle maneuvered herself and Froggy Parker, freshman at Harvard, with whom she had once played hopscotch, to a seat on the stairs. A humorous reference to the past was all she needed	It was a really awkward and clumsy moment, everyone bumping into each other. People ended up talking to the person they wanted to talk to the least. Isabelle managed to get herself and Froggy Parker, a Harvard freshman she used to play hopscotch with, onto a seat on the stairs. A quick, funny reminder of their shared past was all it took.

The things Isabelle could do socially with one idea were remarkable. First, she repeated it rapturously in an enthusiastic contralto with a soupçon of Southern accent; then she held it off at a distance and smiled at it—her wonderful smile; then she delivered it in variations and played a sort of mental catch with it, all this in the nominal form of dialogue. Froggy was fascinated and quite unconscious that this was being done, not for him, but for the green eyes that glistened under the shining carefully watered hair, a little to her left, for Isabelle had discovered Amory. As an actress even in the fullest flush of her own conscious magnetism gets a deep impression of most of the people in the front row, so Isabelle sized up her antagonist	Isabelle was amazing at making a single thought go a long way in a conversation. First, she'd say it with excitement in a low voice, adding a hint of a Southern accent. Then, she'd pause and smile at the idea—a beautiful smile. After that, she'd repeat it in different ways, bouncing the idea around like a game, all while pretending to have a normal conversation. Froggy was hooked and didn't realize she was doing all this to impress the green eyes watching her from slightly to her left, under carefully styled hair. Isabelle had her sights set on Amory. Just like an actress, even when she's feeling her most confident, still notices the audience in the front row, Isabelle was already figuring out her competition.

First, he had auburn hair, and from her feeling of disappointment she knew that she had expected him to be dark and of garter-advertisement slenderness. For the rest, a faint flush and a straight, romantic profile; the effect set off by a close-fitting dress suit and a silk ruffled shirt of the kind that women still delight to see men wear, but men were just beginning to get tired of. During this inspection Amory was quietly watching. “Don’t you think so?” she said suddenly, turning to him, innocent-eyed	First, he had red-brown hair, and she was disappointed because she'd imagined him being dark-haired and super skinny, like a guy in a stocking ad. Besides that, he had a slight blush and a handsome profile; he looked good in his tight tuxedo and a fancy silk, ruffled shirt – the kind women still loved seeing guys wear, but guys were starting to think were old-fashioned. While she was checking him out, Amory was watching her. "Don’t you think so?" she asked suddenly, turning to Amory with an innocent expression.

There was a stir, and Sally led the way over to their table. Amory struggled to Isabelle’s side, and whispered: “You’re my dinner partner, you know	Everyone looked up, and Sally went ahead to their table. Amory pushed his way over to Isabelle and whispered, "You're supposed to be sitting next to me at dinner."

We’re all coached for each other.” Isabelle gasped—this was rather right in line. But really she felt as if a good speech had been taken from the star and given to a minor character. She mustn’t lose the leadership a bit	"We're all told how to act around each other." Isabelle was surprised—that made sense. But she also felt like someone had stolen the best lines from the main character and given them to someone unimportant. She had to stay in charge.

The dinner-table glittered with laughter at the confusion of getting places and then curious eyes were turned on her, sitting near the head. She was enjoying this immensely, and Froggy Parker was so engrossed with the added sparkle of her rising color that he forgot to pull out Sally’s chair, and fell into a dim confusion	At dinner, everyone was laughing as they sorted out where to sit. Then, people started staring at her; she was sitting close to the head of the table. She was loving the attention. Froggy Parker was so captivated by the way she was blushing that he totally forgot to help Sally with her chair and got flustered.

Amory was on the other side, full of confidence and vanity, gazing at her in open admiration. He began directly, and so did Froggy: “I’ve heard a lot about you since you wore braids—” “Wasn’t it funny this afternoon—” Both stopped. Isabelle turned to Amory shyly	Amory, feeling confident and a bit arrogant, was looking at her, clearly impressed. He jumped right in, and so did Froggy: "I've heard about you since you were a kid..." "Wasn't this afternoon funny..." They both stopped talking. Isabelle glanced at Amory, looking a little shy.

Her face was always enough answer for anyone, but she decided to speak. “How—from whom?” “From everybody—for all the years since you’ve been away	Her face usually said it all, but she decided to talk anyway. "How—who told you?" "Everyone—for all the time you've been gone."

She blushed appropriately. On her right Froggy was hors de combat already, although he hadn’t quite realized it. “I’ll tell you what I remembered about you all these years,” Amory continued	She blushed like she was supposed to. On her right, Froggy was already knocked out of the game, even though he didn't know it yet. "I'll tell you what I've remembered about you all this time," Amory went on.

She leaned slightly toward him and looked modestly at the celery before her. Froggy sighed—he knew Amory, and the situations that Amory seemed born to handle. He turned to Sally and asked her if she was going away to school next year	She leaned in a little and glanced down at her celery, acting shy. Froggy sighed – he understood Amory and the awkward situations he always seemed to find himself in. He then asked Sally if she was going to college next year.

Amory opened with grapeshot. “I’ve got an adjective that just fits you.” This was one of his favorite starts—he seldom had a word in mind, but it was a curiosity provoker, and he could always produce something complimentary if he got in a tight corner	Amory started strong. “I have the perfect word to describe you.” He liked to begin conversations this way, even though he usually didn't have a specific word in mind. It got people interested, and he could always think of something nice to say if he had to.

“Oh—what?” Isabelle’s face was a study in enraptured curiosity. Amory shook his head. “I don’t know you very well yet.” “Will you tell me—afterward?” she half whispered	"Huh? What is it?" Isabelle looked totally fascinated and curious. Amory shook his head. "I don't know you that well yet." "Will you tell me later?" she almost whispered.

He nodded. “We’ll sit out	He nodded. "Let's sit outside."

Isabelle nodded. “Did anyone ever tell you, you have keen eyes?” she said	Isabelle nodded. "Has anyone ever told you that you're very observant?" she asked.

Amory attempted to make them look even keener. He fancied, but he was not sure, that her foot had just touched his under the table. But it might possibly have been only the table leg. It was so hard to tell	Amory tried to seem even more interested. He thought, but wasn't positive, that her foot had bumped his under the table. But it could have just been the table leg. It was hard to know for sure.

Still it thrilled him. He wondered quickly if there would be any difficulty in securing the little den upstairs.	It still excited him. He quickly wondered if he could easily get that small room upstairs.

Isabelle and Amory were distinctly not innocent, nor were they particularly brazen. Moreover, amateur standing had very little value in the game they were playing, a game that would presumably be her principal study for years to come. She had begun as he had, with good looks and an excitable temperament, and the rest was the result of accessible popular novels and dressing-room conversation culled from a slightly older set. Isabelle had walked with an artificial gait at nine and a half, and when her eyes, wide and starry, proclaimed the ingenue most, Amory was proportionately less deceived	Isabelle and Amory weren't naive, but they weren't exactly bold either. In their world, being inexperienced didn't matter much. This "game" would probably be her main focus for years. She started like he did, with good looks and a dramatic personality. The rest came from reading popular books and listening to older girls talk in dressing rooms. Isabelle had been acting mature since she was nine, so even when she looked innocent with her big eyes, Amory wasn't fooled.

He waited for the mask to drop off, but at the same time he did not question her right to wear it. She, on her part, was not impressed by his studied air of blasé sophistication. She had lived in a larger city and had slightly an advantage in range	He expected her to be real eventually, but he accepted that she was putting on an act. She wasn't fooled by his fake "cool" act either. She'd lived in a bigger place and had more experience.

But she accepted his pose—it was one of the dozen little conventions of this kind of affair. He was aware that he was getting this particular favor now because she had been coached; he knew that he stood for merely the best game in sight, and that he would have to improve his opportunity before he lost his advantage. So they proceeded with an infinite guile that would have horrified her parents. After the dinner the dance began	She went along with his act. It was just one of the usual little things you do when you're having this kind of romance. He knew she was only being nice because someone had told her to be. He was just the best option around, and he needed to make a move before someone else did. So, they played the game, being sneaky in ways her parents would hate. After dinner, the dancing started.

smoothly. Smoothly?—boys cut in on Isabelle every few feet and then squabbled in the corners with: “You might let me get more than an inch!” and “She didn’t like it either—she told me so next time I cut in	easily. Easily? Guys kept interrupting Isabelle's dances constantly, then arguing in the corners, saying things like, "You could at least let me dance with her for more than a second!" and "She didn't like dancing with you either - she told me the next time I danced with her."

It was true—she told everyone so, and gave every hand a parting pressure that said: “You know that your dances are making my evening.” But time passed, two hours of it, and the less subtle beaux had better learned to focus their pseudo-passionate glances elsewhere, for eleven o’clock found Isabelle and Amory sitting on the couch in the little den off the reading-room upstairs. She was conscious that they were a handsome pair, and seemed to belong distinctively in this seclusion, while lesser lights fluttered and chattered downstairs. Boys who passed the door looked in enviously—girls who passed only laughed and frowned and grew wise within themselves	It was true, she told everyone, and squeezed their hands goodbye as if to say, "You're making my night." But two hours went by, and the guys who weren't so smooth figured out they should stop staring at her so intensely. By eleven, Isabelle and Amory were sitting together on the couch in the small room next to the upstairs reading room. She knew they looked good together and belonged there, while everyone else was downstairs partying. Guys who walked by were jealous. Girls who walked by just laughed, frowned, and acted like they knew something.

They had now reached a very definite stage. They had traded accounts of their progress since they had met last, and she had listened to much she had heard before. He was a sophomore, was on the Princetonian board, hoped to be chairman in senior year	They were at a clear point in their relationship. They'd caught each other up on what they'd been doing since they last saw each other, and she'd heard most of his stuff before. He was a sophomore, working on the university newspaper, and wanted to be the head editor when he was a senior.

He learned that some of the boys she went with in Baltimore were “terrible speeds” and came to dances in states of artificial stimulation; most of them were twenty or so, and drove alluring red Stutzes. A good half seemed to have already flunked out of various schools and colleges, but some of them bore athletic names that made him look at her admiringly	He found out that some of the guys she dated in Baltimore were wild and used drugs or alcohol to get hyped up before parties. Most were around twenty years old and drove cool red Stutz cars. It seemed like half of them had already dropped out or been kicked out of schools and colleges. But some were known athletes, which made him respect her more.

As a matter of fact, Isabelle’s closer acquaintance with the universities was just commencing. She had bowing acquaintance with a lot of young men who thought she was a “pretty kid—worth keeping an eye on.” But Isabelle strung the names into a fabrication of gayety that would have dazzled a Viennese nobleman. Such is the power of young contralto voices on sink-down sofas	Actually, Isabelle was just starting to really get to know the universities. She knew a lot of guys casually who thought she was cute and interesting. But Isabelle made up a whole exciting social life using those names, something that would impress anyone. That's how much influence a young woman with a low singing voice has when she's sitting on a comfy couch.

He asked her if she thought he was conceited. She said there was a difference between conceit and self-confidence. She adored self-confidence in men	He asked if she thought he was arrogant. She said no, there's a difference between arrogance and being confident. She loved when guys were confident.

“Is Froggy a good friend of yours?” she asked. “Rather—why?” “He’s a bum dancer.” Amory laughed	"Is Froggy a good friend?" she asked. "Yeah, why?" "He's a terrible dancer." Amory laughed.

“He dances as if the girl were on his back instead of in his arms.” She appreciated this. “You’re awfully good at sizing people up.” Amory denied this painfully	"He dances like he's carrying her instead of holding her." She thought that was insightful. "You're really good at judging people." Amory strongly disagreed.

However, he sized up several people for her. Then they talked about hands. “You’ve got awfully nice hands,” she said	He checked out a few guys for her, seeing if they might be a good match. Then they started talking about hands. "You have really nice hands," she said.

“They look as if you played the piano. Do you?” I have said they had reached a very definite stage—nay, more, a very critical stage	"Your hands look like you play the piano. Do you?" I told you they were at a serious point – actually, a really crucial one.

Amory had stayed over a day to see her, and his train left at twelve-eighteen that night. His trunk and suitcase awaited him at the station; his watch was beginning to hang heavy in his pocket. “Isabelle,” he said suddenly, “I want to tell you something.” They had been talking lightly about “that funny look in her eyes,” and Isabelle knew from the change in his manner what was coming—indeed, she had been wondering how soon it would come	Amory stayed an extra day to see her, and his train was leaving at 12:18 AM. His luggage was already at the station, and his watch felt heavy in his pocket. "Isabelle," he said quickly, "I need to tell you something." They had been joking about "that look she has," and Isabelle knew from the way he changed that he was about to say something important. She had been wondering when he would.

Amory reached above their heads and turned out the electric light, so that they were in the dark, except for the red glow that fell through the door from the reading-room lamps. Then he began: “I don’t know whether or not you know what you—what I’m going to say. Lordy, Isabelle—this sounds like a line, but it isn’t.” “I know,” said Isabelle softly	Amory reached up and turned off the light. Now it was dark except for the red light coming through the doorway from the reading room. He started talking: "I don't know if you realize what I'm about to say. God, Isabelle, this sounds like a pickup line, but it's not." "I know," Isabelle said quietly.

“Maybe we’ll never meet again like this—I have darned hard luck sometimes.” He was leaning away from her on the other arm of the lounge, but she could see his eyes plainly in the dark	"We might never hang out like this again—I'm often really unlucky." He was leaning back, away from her, but she could still see his eyes clearly in the dark.

“You’ll meet me again—silly.” There was just the slightest emphasis on the last word—so that it became almost a term of endearment. He continued a bit huskily: “I’ve fallen for a lot of people—girls—and I guess you have, too—boys, I mean, but, honestly, you—” he broke off suddenly and leaned forward, chin on his hands: “Oh, what’s the use—you’ll go your way and I suppose I’ll go mine	"You'll see me again, duh." He said "duh" like it was almost a sweet nickname. Then, his voice got a little rough, "I've had crushes on tons of people - girls, you know? And I'm guessing you have too - guys, I mean. But seriously, you..." He stopped short, leaned forward, and rested his chin in his hands. "Ugh, what's the point? You're going to do your thing, and I guess I'll do mine."

Silence for a moment. Isabelle was quite stirred; she wound her handkerchief into a tight ball, and by the faint light that streamed over her, dropped it deliberately on the floor. Their hands touched for an instant, but neither spoke. Silences were becoming more frequent and more delicious	They were quiet for a second. Isabelle was really affected by something; she twisted her handkerchief up tight and, in the dim light, let it fall on the floor on purpose. Their hands brushed briefly, but they didn't say anything. These silent moments were happening more often and were becoming really enjoyable.

Outside another stray couple had come up and were experimenting on the piano in the next room. After the usual preliminary of “chopsticks,” one of them started “Babes in the Woods” and a light tenor carried the words into the den: “Give me your hand– I’ll understand We’re off to slumberland.” Isabelle hummed it softly and trembled as she felt Amory’s hand close over hers	Next door, another random couple showed up and was messing around on the piano. After playing "Chopsticks" for a bit, one of them started playing "Babes in the Woods," and a guy with a clear voice sang the lyrics into the living room: "Give me your hand, I'll understand, we're off to slumberland." Isabelle quietly hummed along and shivered when Amory took her hand.

“Isabelle,” he whispered. “You know I’m mad about you	"Isabelle," he whispered. "You know I'm crazy about you."

You do give a darn about me.” “Yes.” “How much do you care—do you like anyone better?” “No	"You do care about me." "Yes." "How much do you care? Do you like anyone more?" "No."

He could scarcely hear her, although he bent so near that he felt her breath against his cheek. “Isabelle, I’m going back to college for six long months, and why shouldn’t we—if I could only just have one thing to remember you by—” “Close the door	He could barely hear her, even though he leaned in close enough to feel her breath on his face. "Isabelle, I'm going back to college for six whole months, so why shouldn't we—if I could just have one thing to remember you by—" "Close the door."

Her voice had just stirred so that he half wondered whether she had spoken at all. As he swung the door softly shut, the music seemed quivering just outside. “Moonlight is bright, Kiss me good night.” What a wonderful song, she thought—everything was wonderful tonight, most of all this romantic scene in the den, with their hands clinging and the inevitable looming charmingly close	Her voice was so soft he wasn't sure if she'd even said anything. He quietly closed the door, and the music seemed to be right outside. "Moonlight is bright, Kiss me good night." What a great song, she thought. Everything felt amazing tonight, especially this romantic moment in the den, with their hands touching and what was probably going to happen feeling excitingly close.

The future vista of her life seemed an unending succession of scenes like this: under moonlight and pale starlight, and in the backs of warm limousines and in low, cosy roadsters stopped under sheltering trees—only the boy might change, and this one was so nice. He took her hand softly. With a sudden movement he turned it and, holding it to his lips, kissed the palm. “Isabelle!” His whisper blended in the music, and they seemed to float nearer together	She imagined her life stretching out forever, filled with moments like this: under the moon or stars, in the back of fancy cars, or in cute little cars parked under trees. Only the guy might be different, but this guy was really great. He gently took her hand. Then, quickly, he flipped it over and kissed her palm. "Isabelle!" he whispered, his voice mixing with the music, and they felt like they were drifting closer.

Her breath came faster. “Can’t I kiss you, Isabelle—Isabelle?” Lips half parted, she turned her head to him in the dark. Suddenly the ring of voices, the sound of running footsteps surged toward them	She started breathing faster. "Can't I kiss you, Isabelle—Isabelle?" Her lips were slightly open as she turned to face him in the darkness. All at once, the noise of voices and running footsteps rushed closer.

Quick as a flash Amory reached up and turned on the light, and when the door opened and three boys, the wrathy and dance-craving Froggy among them, rushed in, he was turning over the magazines on the table, while she sat without moving, serene and unembarrassed, and even greeted them with a welcoming smile. But her heart was beating wildly, and she felt somehow as if she had been deprived	Amory quickly turned on the light. The door burst open, and three boys, including the angry and eager-to-dance Froggy, rushed in. Amory was already looking through magazines on the table. The girl hadn't moved, looked calm and cool, and even smiled a welcome. But inside, her heart was racing, and she felt like something had been taken from her.

It was evidently over. There was a clamor for a dance, there was a glance that passed between them—on his side despair, on hers regret, and then the evening went on, with the reassured beaux and the eternal cutting in. At quarter to twelve Amory shook hands with her gravely, in the midst of a small crowd assembled to wish him good-speed	It was clearly finished. People were eager to dance. They exchanged a look—he looked devastated, she looked regretful. Then the night continued, with guys feeling confident and constantly cutting in on each other's dances. At 11:45, Amory shook her hand seriously, surrounded by a small group wishing him well.

For an instant he lost his poise, and she felt a bit rattled when a satirical voice from a concealed wit cried: “Take her outside, Amory!” As he took her hand he pressed it a little, and she returned the pressure as she had done to twenty hands that evening—that was all. At two o’clock back at the Weatherbys’ Sally asked her if she and Amory had had a “time” in the den. Isabelle turned to her quietly	He lost his cool for a second, and she felt a little flustered when someone with a sarcastic sense of humor yelled out, "Amory, get her out of here!" He squeezed her hand as he took it, and she squeezed back like she had done with a bunch of other people that night—that was it. Back at the Weatherbys' at two AM, Sally asked if she and Amory had hooked up in the den. Isabelle calmly turned to her.

In her eyes was the light of the idealist, the inviolate dreamer of Joan-like dreams. “No,” she answered	She looked like a dreamer, someone who believed in perfect things like Joan of Arc. “No,” she said.

“I don’t do that sort of thing any more; he asked me to, but I said no.” As she crept in bed she wondered what he’d say in his special delivery tomorrow. He had such a good-looking mouth—would she ever—? “Fourteen angels were watching o’er them,” sang Sally sleepily from the next room. “Damn!” muttered Isabelle, punching the pillow into a luxurious lump and exploring the cold sheets cautiously	"I don't do that stuff anymore. He asked, but I said no." As she got into bed, she wondered what he would write in his letter tomorrow. He had such attractive lips - would she ever...? "Fourteen angels are watching over them," Sally sang sleepily from the next room. "Damn it!" Isabelle mumbled, bunching up the pillow and carefully feeling the cold sheets.

Amory, by way of the Princetonian, had arrived. The minor snobs, finely balanced thermometers of success, warmed to him as the club elections grew nigh, and he and Tom were visited by groups of upper classmen who arrived awkwardly, balanced on the edge of the furniture and talked of all subjects except the one of absorbing interest. Amory was amused at the intent eyes upon him, and, in case the visitors represented some club in which he was not interested, took great pleasure in shocking them with unorthodox remarks. “Oh, let me see—” he said one night to a flabbergasted delegation, “what club do you represent?” With visitors from Ivy and Cottage and Tiger Inn he played the “nice, unspoilt, ingenuous boy” very much at ease and quite unaware of the object of the call	Amory, thanks to his writing for the Princeton paper, was now on the scene. The less important snobs, who were really good at judging who was popular, started liking him as club elections got closer. He and Tom got visits from older students who acted uncomfortable, sat awkwardly, and talked about everything except the club elections, which everyone was really interested in. Amory was entertained by how closely they watched him. If he thought they were from a club he didn't want to join, he enjoyed surprising them with weird things he said. One night, he asked a stunned group, "So, which club are you guys from?" When guys from Ivy, Cottage, and Tiger Inn came, he acted like a "sweet, innocent kid," totally relaxed and pretending he didn't know why they were there.

When the fatal morning arrived, early in March, and the campus became a document in hysteria, he slid smoothly into Cottage with Alec Connage and watched his suddenly neurotic class with much wonder. There were fickle groups that jumped from club to club; there were friends of two or three days who announced tearfully and wildly that they must join the same club, nothing should separate them; there were snarling disclosures of long-hidden grudges as the Suddenly Prominent remembered snubs of freshman year	The day it all went down, early in March, and the whole campus freaked out, Amory just went to Cottage with Alec Connage and watched his class lose it. People were switching clubs like crazy. Friends who'd only known each other for a couple of days were hysterically promising to join the same club so they wouldn't be apart. And people were finally bringing up old grudges from freshman year, now that they had some power.

Unknown men were elevated into importance when they received certain coveted bids; others who were considered “all set” found that they had made unexpected enemies, felt themselves stranded and deserted, talked wildly of leaving college. In his own crowd Amory saw men kept out for wearing green hats, for being “a damn tailor’s dummy,” for having “too much pull in heaven,” for getting drunk one night “not like a gentleman, by God,” or for unfathomable secret reasons known to no one but the wielders of the black balls. This orgy of sociability culminated in a gigantic party at the Nassau Inn, where punch was dispensed from immense bowls, and the whole downstairs became a delirious, circulating, shouting pattern of faces and voices	Guys nobody knew suddenly seemed important when they got invited to the best clubs. Other guys who thought they were popular found out they had enemies, felt lost and alone, and threatened to drop out of school. In Amory's group, he saw people rejected for wearing green hats, for being boring or too well-dressed, for having unfair advantages, or for getting too drunk one night and acting ungentlemanly. Basically, people were rejected for random, secret reasons that only the club members knew. This whole social craziness ended with a huge party at the Nassau Inn. They served punch from giant bowls, and the entire downstairs area was a crazy mix of people yelling and talking.

“Hi, Dibby—’gratulations!” “Goo’ boy, Tom, you got a good bunch in Cap.” “Say, Kerry—” “Oh, Kerry—I hear you went Tiger with all the weightlifters!” “Well, I didn’t go Cottage—the parlor-snakes’ delight.” “They say Overton fainted when he got his Ivy bid—Did he sign up the first day?—oh, no. Tore over to Murray-Dodge on a bicycle—afraid it was a mistake	"Hey Dibby, congrats!" "Good job, Tom, you got a great group in the Cap and Gown Club." "Hey Kerry—" "Oh, Kerry, I heard you joined the Ivy Club with all the jocks!" "Well, I didn't join Cottage Club - that's where all the boring guys hang out." "They're saying Overton passed out when he got his invitation to the Ivy Club. Did he join right away? Nope. He raced over to the Murray-Dodge Hall on a bike – worried they made a mistake."

“How’d you get into Cap—you old roué?” “ ’Gratulations!” “ ’Gratulations yourself. Hear you got a good crowd	"So, how did you get into Princeton, you old womanizer?" "Congrats!" "Congrats to you too. I heard you've got a good group of people."

When the bar closed, the party broke up into groups and streamed, singing, over the snow-clad campus, in a weird delusion that snobbishness and strain were over at last, and that they could do what they pleased for the next two years. Long afterward Amory thought of sophomore spring as the happiest time of his life. His ideas were in tune with life as he found it; he wanted no more than to drift and dream and enjoy a dozen newfound friendships through the April afternoons	After the bar closed, the party split into smaller groups and they walked, singing, across the snowy campus. They felt like the pressure of being pretentious and working hard was finally over, and they could do whatever they wanted for the next two years. Years later, Amory remembered his sophomore spring as the best time of his life. He felt like he understood life and was happy with it. He just wanted to relax, daydream, and enjoy his new friendships during those spring days.

Alec Connage came into his room one morning and woke him up into the sunshine and peculiar glory of Campbell Hall shining in the window. “Wake up, Original Sin, and scrape yourself together. Be in front of Renwick’s in half an hour	Alec Connage barged into his room one morning and woke him up. Sunlight was streaming in, making Campbell Hall look amazing. "Get up, you lazy bum, and get ready. Meet me in front of Renwick's in thirty minutes."

Somebody’s got a car.” He took the bureau cover and carefully deposited it, with its load of small articles, upon the bed	"Someone has a car." He picked up the cloth from the dresser and gently placed it, with all the small things on it, on the bed.

“Where’d you get the car?” demanded Amory cynically. “Sacred trust, but don’t be a critical goopher or you can’t go!” “I think I’ll sleep,” Amory said calmly, resettling himself and reaching beside the bed for a cigarette. “Sleep!” “Why not? I’ve got a class at eleven-thirty	"Where'd you get the car?" Amory asked, not believing him. "It's a secret, but don't be such a downer or you're not coming!" "I think I'll sleep," Amory said, relaxing and grabbing a cigarette. "Sleep!" "Why not? I have a class at eleven-thirty."

“You damned gloom! Of course, if you don’t want to go to the coast—” With a bound Amory was out of bed, scattering the bureau cover’s burden on the floor. The coast. he hadn’t seen it for years, since he and his mother were on their pilgrimage	"Cheer up, you downer! If you don't want to go to the beach..." Amory jumped out of bed, knocking everything off the dresser. The beach! He hadn't been there in ages, not since he and his mom took that trip.

“Who’s going?” he demanded as he wriggled into his B.V.D.S.	"Who's going?" he asked while struggling to put on his underwear.

“Oh, Dick Humbird and Kerry Holiday and Jesse Ferrenby and—oh about five or six	"Oh, Dick Humbird, Kerry Holiday, Jesse Ferrenby, and like five or six others."

Speed it up, kid!” In ten minutes Amory was devouring cornflakes in Renwick’s, and at nine-thirty they bowled happily out of town, headed for the sands of Deal Beach. “You see,” said Kerry, “the car belongs down there	"Step on it, kid!" Ten minutes later, Amory was wolfing down cornflakes at Renwick's, and by 9:30 they were driving out of town, excited to get to Deal Beach. "See?" Kerry said, "This car belongs at the beach."

In fact, it was stolen from Asbury Park by persons unknown, who deserted it in Princeton and left for the West. Heartless Humbird here got permission from the city council to deliver it.” “Anybody got any money?” suggested Ferrenby, turning around from the front seat. There was an emphatic negative chorus	It was actually stolen from Asbury Park by some unknown people. They abandoned it in Princeton and took off for the West. Then, that jerk Humbird got the city council's permission to bring it here." "Anyone got any cash?" Ferrenby asked, turning around in his seat. Everyone quickly said no.

“That makes it interesting.” “Money—what’s money? We can sell the car.” “Charge him salvage or something.” “How’re we going to get food?” asked Amory	"Okay, that makes things interesting." "Money? Who cares about money? We can sell the car." "Let's charge him for the damage or something." "How are we going to get food?" Amory asked.

“Honestly,” answered Kerry, eying him reprovingly, “do you doubt Kerry’s ability for three short days? Some people have lived on nothing for years at a time. Read the Boy Scout Monthly	"Seriously?" Kerry replied, looking at him like he was doing something wrong. "You don't think I can handle three days? People have survived on almost nothing for years. Ever read 'Boy's Life'?"

“Three days,” Amory mused, “and I’ve got classes.” “One of the days is the Sabbath.” “Just the same, I can only cut six more classes, with over a month and a half to go.” “Throw him out!” “It’s a long walk back	"Three days," Amory thought. "And I have classes to attend." "One of those days is Sunday." "Still, I can only skip six more classes, and there's still a month and a half left of the semester." "Kick him out!" "It's a long walk back."

“Amory, you’re running it out, if I may coin a new phrase.” “Hadn’t you better get some dope on yourself, Amory?” Amory subsided resignedly and drooped into a contemplation of the scenery. Swinburne seemed to fit in somehow	"Amory, you're ruining things," I guess I could say that. "Maybe you should figure yourself out, Amory?" Amory sighed and started staring out the window, thinking. Swinburne [the poet] seemed to make sense in that moment.

“Oh, winter’s rains and ruins are over, And all the seasons of snows and sins; The days dividing lover and lover, The light that loses, the night that wins; And time remembered is grief forgotten, And frosts are slain and flowers begotten, And in green underwood and cover, Blossom by blossom the spring begins. “The full streams feed on flower of—” “What’s the matter, Amory? Amory’s thinking about poetry, about the pretty birds and flowers	"Winter's bad weather and destruction are done, and so are the times of snow and bad behavior. The days that kept lovers apart, the light that fades, the night that wins out-- all that's over. When we remember the past, we forget the sadness. The cold is gone, and flowers are born. And hidden in the green woods, spring starts, flower by flower.” The rivers are full of..." "What's wrong, Amory? He's thinking about poetry, about pretty birds and flowers.

I can see it in his eye.” “No, I’m not,” he lied	"I can tell by looking at him." "No, I'm not," he said, lying.

“I’m thinking about the Princetonian. I ought to make up tonight; but I can telephone back, I suppose	"I'm thinking about the school paper. I should probably write something for it tonight, but I guess I could always call them later."

“Oh,” said Kerry respectfully, “these important men—” Amory flushed and it seemed to him that Ferrenby, a defeated competitor, winced a little. Of course, Kerry was only kidding, but he really mustn’t mention the Princetonian. It was a halcyon day, and as they neared the shore and the salt breezes scurried by, he began to picture the ocean and long, level stretches of sand and red roofs over blue sea	"Oh," Kerry said, trying to sound impressed, "these big shots—" Amory felt his face get hot, and he thought Ferrenby, who had lost out, seemed to cringe a little. Of course, Kerry was just joking, but he shouldn't bring up the Princeton magazine. It was a perfect day, and as they got closer to the beach and the salty wind blew around them, he started imagining the ocean, long flat beaches, and red roofs overlooking the blue water.

Then they hurried through the little town and it all flashed upon his consciousness to a mighty paean of emotion. “Oh, good Lord! Look at it!” he cried. “What?” “Let me out, quick—I haven’t seen it for eight years! Oh, gentlefolk, stop the car!” “What an odd child!” remarked Alec. “I do believe he’s a bit eccentric	They rushed through the small town, and it suddenly hit him, filling him with overwhelming emotion. "Oh my God! Look at it!" he shouted. "What?" "Let me out, quickly—I haven't seen it in eight years! Please, stop the car!" "What a strange kid!" Alec said. "I think he's a little weird."

The car was obligingly drawn up at a curb, and Amory ran for the boardwalk. First, he realized that the sea was blue and that there was an enormous quantity of it, and that it roared and roared—really all the banalities about the ocean that one could realize, but if anyone had told him then that these things were banalities, he would have gaped in wonder. “Now we’ll get lunch,” ordered Kerry, wandering up with the crowd	The car conveniently pulled over to the side of the road, and Amory hurried toward the beach. He noticed right away that the ocean was blue, there was a whole lot of it, and it made a loud, constant roaring sound. Basically, everything obvious about the ocean hit him at once. But if someone had pointed out how cliché these observations were, he would have been totally surprised. "Let's grab some lunch," Kerry said, walking over with everyone else.

“Come on, Amory, tear yourself away and get practical.” “We’ll try the best hotel first,” he went on, “and thence and so forth.” They strolled along the boardwalk to the most imposing hostelry in sight, and, entering the dining-room, scattered about a table. “Eight Bronxes,” commanded Alec, “and a club sandwich and Juliennes	"Come on, Amory, snap out of it and be realistic." He continued, "Let's hit up the nicest hotel first, and, you know, go from there." They walked along the boardwalk to the biggest hotel they could see. Once inside the dining room, they all sat down around a table. "Eight Bronx cocktails," Alec ordered, "plus a club sandwich and some fries."

The food for one. Hand the rest around.” Amory ate little, having seized a chair where he could watch the sea and feel the rock of it. When luncheon was over they sat and smoked quietly	"Just food for me, everyone else can share." Amory didn't eat much. He grabbed a chair where he could see the ocean and feel the rocking. After lunch, they relaxed and smoked in silence.

“What’s the bill?” Someone scanned it. “Eight twenty-five.” “Rotten overcharge. We’ll give them two dollars and one for the waiter	"How much do we owe?" Someone looked at the check. "Eight dollars and twenty-five cents." "They're ripping us off. Let's leave two dollars for the bill and a dollar for the waiter."

Kerry, collect the small change.” The waiter approached, and Kerry gravely handed him a dollar, tossed two dollars on the check, and turned away	"Kerry, get the coins." The waiter came over, and Kerry seriously gave him a dollar, threw two dollars on the bill, and walked off.

They sauntered leisurely toward the door, pursued in a moment by the suspicious Ganymede. “Some mistake, sir.” Kerry took the bill and examined it critically. “No mistake!” he said, shaking his head gravely, and, tearing it into four pieces, he handed the scraps to the waiter, who was so dumbfounded that he stood motionless and expressionless while they walked out	They strolled casually toward the exit, and the bartender quickly followed, looking annoyed. "There's been a mistake, sir." Kerry took the check and looked it over carefully. "No mistake!" he said, seriously shaking his head. He tore the check into pieces and gave them to the waiter, who was so shocked he just stood there, blank-faced, as they left.

“Won’t he send after us?” “No,” said Kerry; “for a minute he’ll think we’re the proprietor’s sons or something; then he’ll look at the check again and call the manager, and in the meantime—” They left the car at Asbury and streetcar’d to Allenhurst, where they investigated the crowded pavilions for beauty. At four there were refreshments in a lunchroom, and this time they paid an even smaller percent on the total cost; something about the appearance and savoir-faire of the crowd made the thing go, and they were not pursued. “You see, Amory, we’re Marxian Socialists,” explained Kerry	"Will he chase us?" "No," Kerry replied, "At first, he'll think we're the owner's kids or something. Then he'll double-check the bill, call the manager, and by then—" They ditched the car in Asbury and took a streetcar to Allenhurst, checking out the pretty girls at the packed boardwalk. Around four, they got snacks at a lunch place, and again, barely paid their share. Somehow, the way everyone looked and acted made it work, and nobody came after them. "See, Amory, we're like, Marxist Socialists," Kerry joked.

“We don’t believe in property and we’re putting it to the great test.” “Night will descend,” Amory suggested. “Watch, and put your trust in Holiday.” They became jovial about five-thirty and, linking arms, strolled up and down the boardwalk in a row, chanting a monotonous ditty about the sad sea waves	"We don't believe in owning things, and we're really putting that to the test." "It'll get dark soon," Amory said. "Just wait and see what happens with Holiday." Around 5:30, they got happy, linked arms, and walked back and forth on the boardwalk, singing a simple, repetitive song about the lonely ocean waves.

Then Kerry saw a face in the crowd that attracted him and, rushing off, reappeared in a moment with one of the homeliest girls Amory had ever set eyes on. Her pale mouth extended from ear to ear, her teeth projected in a solid wedge, and she had little, squinty eyes that peeped ingratiatingly over the side sweep of her nose. Kerry presented them formally	Kerry spotted someone in the crowd who caught his attention. He hurried away and came back with a girl who was, in Amory's opinion, really unattractive. She had a wide, pale mouth, buck teeth, and small, squinting eyes that looked up in a flattering way over her large nose. Kerry introduced them properly.

“Name of Kaluka, Hawaiian queen! Let me present Messrs. Connage, Sloane, Humbird, Ferrenby, and Blaine	"By the name of Queen Kaluka of Hawaii, let me introduce Connage, Sloane, Humbird, Ferrenby, and Blaine."

The girl bobbed courtesies all around. Poor creature; Amory supposed she had never before been noticed in her life—possibly she was half-witted	The girl kept bowing awkwardly to everyone. Amory felt sorry for her; he figured no one had ever paid attention to her before. Maybe she wasn't all there.

While she accompanied them (Kerry had invited her to supper) she said nothing which could discountenance such a belief. “She prefers her native dishes,” said Alec gravely to the waiter, “but any coarse food will do.” All through supper he addressed her in the most respectful language, while Kerry made idiotic love to her on the other side, and she giggled and grinned. Amory was content to sit and watch the byplay, thinking what a light touch Kerry had, and how he could transform the barest incident into a thing of curve and contour	Even though she was with them (Kerry had asked her to dinner), she didn't say anything to make them doubt that belief. “She likes her own country's food best,” Alec said seriously to the waiter, “but any simple food will work.” He spoke to her very politely all evening, while Kerry flirted with her in a silly way on the other side of the table, and she just laughed and smiled a lot. Amory just watched them, thinking how easily Kerry could turn even the simplest thing into something interesting and special.

They all seemed to have the spirit of it more or less, and it was a relaxation to be with them. Amory usually liked men individually, yet feared them in crowds unless the crowd was around him. He wondered how much each one contributed to the party, for there was somewhat of a spiritual tax levied. Alec and Kerry were the life of it, but not quite the centre	They all seemed to get the general vibe, so it was easy to hang out with them. Amory usually liked guys one-on-one, but felt uneasy around groups unless he was the center of attention. He wondered how much everyone added to the party, like there was some kind of unspoken energy cost. Alec and Kerry made it fun, but they weren't really the focus.

Somehow the quiet Humbird, and Sloane, with his impatient superciliousness, were the centre. Dick Humbird had, ever since freshman year, seemed to Amory a perfect type of aristocrat. He was slender but well-built—black curly hair, straight features, and rather a dark skin. Everything he said sounded intangibly appropriate	Quiet Humbird and impatient, snobby Sloane were somehow the cool kids. Amory had thought Dick Humbird was the perfect rich guy type ever since their first year of college. He was skinny but fit, with black curly hair, a straight nose and mouth, and kind of dark skin. Everything he said just seemed right.

He possessed infinite courage, an averagely good mind, and a sense of honor with a clear charm and noblesse oblige that varied it from righteousness. He could dissipate without going to pieces, and even his most bohemian adventures never seemed “running it out	He was incredibly brave, had a pretty good brain, and his sense of honor had a cool charm that wasn't just being self-righteous. He could party hard without falling apart, and even his wildest adventures never felt like he was just wasting his life.

People dressed like him, tried to talk as he did. Amory decided that he probably held the world back, but he wouldn’t have changed him	People copied his style and the way he spoke. Amory thought this guy was probably holding the world back, but he still wouldn’t have changed him.

He differed from the healthy type that was essentially middle class—he never seemed to perspire. Some people couldn’t be familiar with a chauffeur without having it returned; Humbird could have lunched at Sherry’s with a colored man, yet people would have somehow known that it was all right	He wasn't like those normal, middle-class guys; he never seemed to sweat. Some people couldn't be nice to someone like a driver without the driver getting too comfortable. Humbird could have eaten lunch at a fancy restaurant with a Black man, and people would have just known it was okay.

He was not a snob, though he knew only half his class. His friends ranged from the highest to the lowest, but it was impossible to “cultivate” him. Servants worshipped him, and treated him like a god	He wasn't stuck-up, even though he only knew some people from his year. He was friends with everyone, rich or poor, but you couldn't try to impress him. The staff loved him and treated him like he was special.

He seemed the eternal example of what the upper class tries to be. “He’s like those pictures in the Illustrated London News of the English officers who have been killed,” Amory had said to Alec. “Well,” Alec had answered, “if you want to know the shocking truth, his father was a grocery clerk who made a fortune in Tacoma real estate and came to New York ten years ago	He seemed like the perfect example of what rich people try to be. Amory had told Alec, "He's like those photos in the Illustrated London News of dead English officers." Alec replied, "Okay, but the surprising truth is his dad was just a grocery store worker who got rich from real estate in Tacoma and moved to New York ten years ago."

Amory had felt a curious sinking sensation. This present type of party was made possible by the surging together of the class after club elections—as if to make a last desperate attempt to know itself, to keep together, to fight off the tightening spirit of the clubs. It was a letdown from the conventional heights they had all walked so rigidly. After supper they saw Kaluka to the boardwalk, and then strolled back along the beach to Asbury	Amory felt a little down. These kinds of parties happened because everyone in their class got together after club elections. It was like they were trying really hard to connect, stay friends, and resist the exclusive feel of the clubs. It wasn't as fancy or formal as they usually acted. After eating, they walked Kaluka to the boardwalk and then walked back to Asbury along the beach.

The evening sea was a new sensation, for all its color and mellow age was gone, and it seemed the bleak waste that made the Norse sagas sad; Amory thought of Kipling’s “Beaches of Lukanon before the sealers came.” It was still a music, though, infinitely sorrowful	The sea that evening felt different. All its usual vibrant colors and calm beauty were gone. It felt like the desolate, sad ocean from old Viking stories. Amory remembered Kipling's poem about a beach before people ruined it. Even though it was sad, the sea still had a kind of beautiful, sorrowful music to it.

Ten o’clock found them penniless. They had suppered greatly on their last eleven cents and, singing, strolled up through the casinos and lighted arches on the boardwalk, stopping to listen approvingly to all band concerts	By ten o'clock, they were broke. They'd had a great last meal for just eleven cents, and were singing as they walked through the casinos and under the bright lights of the boardwalk, stopping to enjoy the band concerts.

In one place Kerry took up a collection for the French War Orphans which netted a dollar and twenty cents, and with this they bought some brandy in case they caught cold in the night. They finished the day in a moving-picture show and went into solemn systematic roars of laughter at an ancient comedy, to the startled annoyance of the rest of the audience. Their entrance was distinctly strategic, for each man as he entered pointed reproachfully at the one just behind him. Sloane, bringing up the rear, disclaimed all knowledge and responsibility as soon as the others were scattered inside; then as the irate ticket-taker rushed in he followed nonchalantly	Kerry passed around a hat to collect money for French war orphans, raising a dollar and twenty cents. With that, they bought brandy, just in case they got sick during the night. They ended the day at a movie, laughing really loudly at an old, funny movie, which annoyed everyone else. They walked in carefully, each guy blaming the one behind him for everything. Sloane, who came in last, pretended he didn't know them once they were inside. Then, when the angry ticket guy went inside, Sloane followed like he didn't have a care in the world.

They reassembled later by the Casino and made arrangements for the night. Kerry wormed permission from the watchman to sleep on the platform and, having collected a huge pile of rugs from the booths to serve as mattresses and blankets, they talked until midnight, and then fell into a dreamless sleep, though Amory tried hard to stay awake and watch that marvellous moon settle on the sea	Later, they met up near the Casino and figured out what to do for the night. Kerry managed to get the watchman's okay to sleep on the platform. They gathered a big stack of rugs from the stalls to use as beds and blankets. They talked until midnight, and then crashed out, sleeping deeply. Amory really tried to stay awake and watch the amazing moon set over the ocean, but couldn't.

So they progressed for two happy days, up and down the shore by streetcar or machine, or by shoe-leather on the crowded boardwalk; sometimes eating with the wealthy, more frequently dining frugally at the expense of an unsuspecting restaurateur. They had their photos taken, eight poses, in a quick-development store	For two days, they had fun together, traveling along the beach by trolley, car, or walking the busy boardwalk. Sometimes they ate with rich people, but usually they ate cheaply, maybe even skipping out on the bill at restaurants. They got their pictures taken at a fast photo place, eight different shots.

Kerry insisted on grouping them as a “varsity” football team, and then as a tough gang from the East Side, with their coats inside out, and himself sitting in the middle on a cardboard moon. The photographer probably has them yet—at least, they never called for them	Kerry wanted to call them a "varsity" football team and then a rough gang from the East Side, wearing their coats inside out. He made himself the center of attention, sitting on a cardboard moon. The photographer probably still has the pictures, or at least, no one ever asked for them.

The weather was perfect, and again they slept outside, and again Amory fell unwillingly asleep. Sunday broke stolid and respectable, and even the sea seemed to mumble and complain, so they returned to Princeton via the Fords of transient farmers, and broke up with colds in their heads, but otherwise none the worse for wandering	The weather was great, so they slept outside again, and Amory reluctantly fell asleep. Sunday was dull and ordinary. Even the ocean seemed to grumble. They drove back to Princeton in borrowed cars from temporary farmers, catching colds, but overall, okay after their trip.

Even more than in the year before, Amory neglected his work, not deliberately but lazily and through a multitude of other interests. Coordinate geometry and the melancholy hexameters of Corneille and Racine held forth small allurements, and even psychology, which he had eagerly awaited, proved to be a dull subject full of muscular reactions and biological phrases rather than the study of personality and influence	Like the year before, Amory really slacked off on his schoolwork. He didn't mean to, he was just lazy and had too many other things going on. Geometry and those sad poems by Corneille and Racine didn't interest him much. Even psychology, which he'd been looking forward to, turned out to be boring, all about body stuff and science terms instead of understanding people.

That was a noon class, and it always sent him dozing. Having found that “subjective and objective, sir,” answered most of the questions, he used the phrase on all occasions, and it became the class joke when, on a query being levelled at him, he was nudged awake by Ferrenby or Sloane to gasp it out	It was a midday class, and it always made him sleepy. He'd discovered that saying "subjective and objective, sir" worked as an answer to most questions. So, he used it every time. It became a running joke in the class. Whenever he was asked something, Ferrenby or Sloane would elbow him awake so he could blurt it out.

Mostly there were parties—to Orange or the Shore, more rarely to New York and Philadelphia, though one night they marshalled fourteen waitresses out of Childs’ and took them to ride down Fifth Avenue on top of an auto bus. They all cut more classes than were allowed, which meant an additional course the following year, but spring was too rare to let anything interfere with their colorful ramblings	They mostly went to parties – either in Orange or at the beach. Sometimes they went to New York or Philadelphia. One night, they even grabbed fourteen waitresses from Childs' restaurant and took them for a ride down Fifth Avenue on top of a bus. They skipped way more classes than they were supposed to, which meant they had to take an extra class next year. But they didn't care, because spring was too amazing to let anything stop them from having fun.

In May Amory was elected to the Sophomore Prom Committee, and when after a long evening’s discussion with Alec they made out a tentative list of class probabilities for the senior council, they placed themselves among the surest. The senior council was composed presumably of the eighteen most representative seniors, and in view of Alec’s football managership and Amory’s chance of nosing out Burne Holiday as Princetonian chairman, they seemed fairly justified in this presumption. Oddly enough, they both placed D’Invilliers as among the possibilities, a guess that a year before the class would have gaped at	In May, Amory got onto the committee for the Sophomore Prom. Later, after talking for hours with Alec, they made a rough list of who would likely be on the Senior Council, and they put themselves near the top. The Senior Council was supposed to be made up of the eighteen most popular seniors. Since Alec was the football team's manager and Amory had a good shot at beating Burne Holiday to become chairman of the *Princetonian* newspaper, they thought they had a pretty good chance. Surprisingly, they even thought D'Invilliers might make it, which would have seemed crazy to everyone a year earlier.

All through the spring Amory had kept up an intermittent correspondence with Isabelle Borgé, punctuated by violent squabbles and chiefly enlivened by his attempts to find new words for love. He discovered Isabelle to be discreetly and aggravatingly unsentimental in letters, but he hoped against hope that she would prove not too exotic a bloom to fit the large spaces of spring as she had fitted the den in the Minnehaha Club	Throughout the spring, Amory kept writing to Isabelle Borgé on and off. They argued a lot. The best part was him trying to come up with new ways to say "I love you." He realized Isabelle wasn't very open with her feelings in her letters, which annoyed him. But he really hoped she wouldn't be too different or "fancy" to enjoy the spring with him, like she had enjoyed spending time with him at the Minnehaha Club.

During May he wrote thirty-page documents almost nightly, and sent them to her in bulky envelopes exteriorly labelled “Part I” and “Part II.” “Oh, Alec, I believe I’m tired of college,” he said sadly, as they walked the dusk together	In May, he wrote long papers, about thirty pages each, almost every night. He mailed them to her in big envelopes with "Part 1" and "Part 2" written on the outside. "Man, I think I'm over college," he said sadly as they walked together in the evening.

“I think I am, too, in a way.” “All I’d like would be a little home in the country, some warm country, and a wife, and just enough to do to keep from rotting.” “Me, too.” “I’d like to quit	"Yeah, I guess I am too, kind of." "All I want is a small house somewhere warm, a wife, and just enough work to stay busy." "Me too." "I want to stop."

“What does your girl say?” “Oh!” Amory gasped in horror. “She wouldn’t think of marrying	"What does your girlfriend say?" "Oh!" Amory said, shocked. "She'd never want to get married."

that is, not now. I mean the future, you know.” “My girl would. I’m engaged	"Not right now, I'm talking about the future, you know?" "My girl would. We're engaged."

“Are you really?” “Yes. Don’t say a word to anybody, please, but I am. I may not come back next year.” “But you’re only twenty! Give up college?” “Why, Amory, you were saying a minute ago—” “Yes,” Amory interrupted, “but I was just wishing	"Really?" "Yeah, I am. Please don't tell anyone, okay? I might not come back next year." "But you're only twenty! You'd quit college?" "Hey, Amory, you were just saying..." "Yeah," Amory cut in, "but I was just hoping."

I wouldn’t think of leaving college. It’s just that I feel so sad these wonderful nights	I don't want to drop out of college. It's just that I feel really down on these beautiful nights.

I sort of feel they’re never coming again, and I’m not really getting all I could out of them. I wish my girl lived here	I have a feeling they're gone for good, and I'm not enjoying them as much as I should. I wish my girlfriend lived here.

But marry—not a chance. Especially as father says the money isn’t forthcoming as it used to be.” “What a waste these nights are!” agreed Alec. But Amory sighed and made use of the nights	"Marriage? No way. Especially since my dad says the money's not flowing like it used to." "What a bummer these nights are!" Alec said. But Amory sighed and still used the nights for something.

He had a snapshot of Isabelle, enshrined in an old watch, and at eight almost every night he would turn off all the lights except the desk lamp and, sitting by the open windows with the picture before him, write her rapturous letters. Oh it’s so hard to write you what I really feel when I think about you so much; you’ve gotten to mean to me a dream that I can’t put on paper any more. Your last letter came and it was wonderful! I read it over about six times, especially the last part, but I do wish, sometimes, you’d be more frank and tell me what you really do think of me, yet your last letter was too good to be true, and I can hardly wait until June! Be sure and be able to come to the prom	He kept a photo of Isabelle in an old watch. Almost every night around eight, he'd turn off all the lights except the desk lamp. Then, sitting by the open window with the picture in front of him, he'd write her passionate letters. It's so hard to tell you how I really feel when I think about you so much. You've become like a dream to me, one I can't even describe. Your last letter was amazing! I read it like, six times, especially the end. But I wish you'd be more honest sometimes and just tell me what you really think of me. Still, your last letter was almost too good to be true, and I can't wait for June! Make sure you can come to the prom.

It’ll be fine, I think, and I want to bring you just at the end of a wonderful year. I often think over what you said on that night and wonder how much you meant. If it were anyone but you—but you see I thought you were fickle the first time I saw you and you are so popular and everthing that I can’t imagine you really liking me best. Oh, Isabelle, dear—it’s a wonderful night	It'll be okay, I hope, and I want to meet you right after a great year. I keep thinking about what you said that night and wondering how serious you were. If it was anyone else—but the thing is, I thought you were someone who changed their mind easily when I first saw you. Plus, you're so popular and all, so I can't believe you actually like me the most. Oh, Isabelle, honey—it's an amazing night.

Somebody is playing “Love Moon” on a mandolin far across the campus, and the music seems to bring you into the window. Now he’s playing “Goodbye, Boys, I’m Through,” and how well it suits me	Someone's playing "Love Moon" on a mandolin way over on the other side of campus, and the music feels like it's pulling you outside to look at it. Now he's playing "Goodbye, Boys, I'm Done," which is exactly how I feel right now.

For I am through with everything. I have decided never to take a cocktail again, and I know I’ll never again fall in love—I couldn’t—you’ve been too much a part of my days and nights to ever let me think of another girl. I meet them all the time and they don’t interest me	I'm done with everything. I've decided to quit drinking cocktails for good, and I know I'll never fall in love again. I can't – you've been too present in my life, day and night, for me to ever think about another girl. I meet girls all the time, but I'm just not interested.

I’m not pretending to be blasé, because it’s not that. It’s just that I’m in love. Oh, dearest Isabelle (somehow I can’t call you just Isabelle, and I’m afraid I’ll come out with the “dearest” before your family this June), you’ve got to come to the prom, and then I’ll come up to your house for a day and everything’ll be perfect	I'm not acting like I don't care, because that's not it. I'm just in love. Oh, dearest Isabelle (I can't just call you Isabelle, and I'm worried I'll call you "dearest" in front of your family this June), you have to come to the prom, and then I'll visit you at your house for a day and everything will be perfect.

And so on in an eternal monotone that seemed to both of them infinitely charming, infinitely new.	They just kept talking like that, in the same boring way, but somehow it felt amazing and fresh to both of them.

June came and the days grew so hot and lazy that they could not worry even about exams, but spent dreamy evenings on the court of Cottage, talking of long subjects until the sweep of country toward Stony Brook became a blue haze and the lilacs were white around tennis-courts, and words gave way to silent cigarettes. Then down deserted Prospect and along McCosh with song everywhere around them, up to the hot joviality of Nassau Street. Tom D’Invilliers and Amory walked late in those days. A gambling fever swept through the sophomore class and they bent over the bones till three o’clock many a sultry night	June arrived, and it got so hot and chill that no one cared about exams. They just hung out on the Cottage lawn in the evenings, talking about deep stuff until the countryside near Stony Brook blurred into a blue haze. The lilacs around the tennis courts looked white, and eventually, they stopped talking and just smoked cigarettes. Then they’d wander down Prospect Avenue and along McCosh Walk, with singing coming from all directions, up to the lively, bustling Nassau Street. Tom D’Invilliers and Amory stayed out late those nights. A gambling craze hit the sophomore class, and they were up late playing dice (or a similar game) on hot nights, often until 3 AM.

After one session they came out of Sloane’s room to find the dew fallen and the stars old in the sky. “Let’s borrow bicycles and take a ride,” Amory suggested	After hanging out in Sloane's room, they came out and saw the dew had settled and the stars looked ancient. "Let's grab some bikes and go for a ride," Amory said.

“All right. I’m not a bit tired and this is almost the last night of the year, really, because the prom stuff starts Monday.” They found two unlocked bicycles in Holder Court and rode out about half-past three along the Lawrenceville Road	"Okay. I'm not tired at all, and this is basically the last night of the year, since prom stuff starts on Monday." They found a couple of unlocked bikes in Holder Court and rode out around 3:30 AM along the Lawrenceville Road.

“What are you going to do this summer, Amory?” “Don’t ask me—same old things, I suppose. A month or two in Lake Geneva—I’m counting on you to be there in July, you know—then there’ll be Minneapolis, and that means hundreds of summer hops, parlor-snaking, getting bored—But oh, Tom,” he added suddenly, “hasn’t this year been slick!” “No,” declared Tom emphatically, a new Tom, clothed by Brooks, shod by Franks, “I’ve won this game, but I feel as if I never want to play another. You’re all right—you’re a rubber ball, and somehow it suits you, but I’m sick of adapting myself to the local snobbishness of this corner of the world. I want to go where people aren’t barred because of the color of their neckties and the roll of their coats	"What's the plan for summer, Amory?" "Don't even ask—probably the same stuff. Maybe a month or two at Lake Geneva—you better be there in July! Then Minneapolis, which means tons of summer parties, flirting, and getting bored. But hey, Tom," he added quickly, "wasn't this year awesome?" "No," Tom said firmly, a changed Tom, dressed by Brooks Brothers, with shoes from Franks, "I won, but I never want to do that again. You're fine—you bounce back from everything, and it works for you. But I'm tired of changing myself to fit in with the rich snobs around here. I want to go somewhere people aren't judged by their clothes."

“You can’t, Tom,” argued Amory, as they rolled along through the scattering night; “wherever you go now you’ll always unconsciously apply these standards of ‘having it’ or ‘lacking it.’ For better or worse we’ve stamped you; you’re a Princeton type!” “Well, then,” complained Tom, his cracked voice rising plaintively, “why do I have to come back at all? I’ve learned all that Princeton has to offer	"No, you can't, Tom," Amory said, as they drove through the fading night. "Wherever you go now, you'll always judge things based on whether you 'have it' or 'don't.' We've marked you, for good or bad; you're a Princeton guy now!" "Okay, but then," Tom whined, his voice cracking with frustration, "why do I have to go back at all? I've already learned everything Princeton can teach me."

Two years more of mere pedantry and lying around a club aren’t going to help. They’re just going to disorganize me, conventionalize me completely	Two more years of boring schoolwork and just hanging out won't help. They'll just mess me up and make me totally normal.

Even now I’m so spineless that I wonder how I get away with it.” “Oh, but you’re missing the real point, Tom,” Amory interrupted	"Even now, I'm such a coward, I don't know how I manage to pull things off." "But you're missing the whole point, Tom," Amory cut in.

“You’ve just had your eyes opened to the snobbishness of the world in a rather abrupt manner. Princeton invariably gives the thoughtful man a social sense	"You just realized how stuck-up people can be, and it hit you hard. Going to Princeton usually makes smart people aware of social class."

“You consider you taught me that, don’t you?” he asked quizzically, eying Amory in the half dark. Amory laughed quietly. “Didn’t I?” “Sometimes,” he said slowly, “I think you’re my bad angel. I might have been a pretty fair poet	"So, you think you taught me that, huh?" he asked, looking at Amory in the dim light, a bit puzzled. Amory chuckled softly. "Didn't I?" "Sometimes," he replied slowly, "I think you're a bad influence on me. I could have been a decent poet."

“Come on, that’s rather hard. You chose to come to an Eastern college	"Hey, that's a bit unfair. You decided to go to a college in the East."

Either your eyes were opened to the mean scrambling quality of people, or you’d have gone through blind, and you’d hate to have done that—been like Marty Kaye.” “Yes,” he agreed, “you’re right. I wouldn’t have liked it	Either you figured out how selfish people can be, or you'd have stayed clueless. You wouldn't want that – to be like Marty Kaye." "Yeah," he said, "you're right. I wouldn't have liked that."

Still, it’s hard to be made a cynic at twenty.” “I was born one,” Amory murmured. “I’m a cynical idealist.” He paused and wondered if that meant anything	It's tough to become cynical when you're only twenty." "I was born cynical," Amory mumbled. "I'm a cynical idealist." He stopped, wondering if that even made sense.

They reached the sleeping school of Lawrenceville, and turned to ride back. “It’s good, this ride, isn’t it?” Tom said presently	They got to the closed-down Lawrenceville school and started heading back. "This ride is nice, right?" Tom asked after a bit.

“Yes; it’s a good finish, it’s knockout; everything’s good tonight. Oh, for a hot, languorous summer and Isabelle!” “Oh, you and your Isabelle! I’ll bet she’s a simple one. let’s say some poetry	"Yeah, that's a great ending, a real winner; everything's great tonight. Man, I wish it was summer, hot and lazy, with Isabelle!" "Ugh, you're always going on about Isabelle! I bet she's not that smart. Let's read some poetry instead."

So Amory declaimed “The Ode to a Nightingale” to the bushes they passed. “I’ll never be a poet,” said Amory as he finished	Amory recited "Ode to a Nightingale" out loud to the trees as they walked by. When he was done, he said, "I'll never be a poet."

“I’m not enough of a sensualist really; there are only a few obvious things that I notice as primarily beautiful: women, spring evenings, music at night, the sea; I don’t catch the subtle things like ‘silver-snarling trumpets.’ I may turn out an intellectual, but I’ll never write anything but mediocre poetry.” They rode into Princeton as the sun was making colored maps of the sky behind the graduate school, and hurried to the refreshment of a shower that would have to serve in place of sleep	"I'm not that into physical pleasures. I only really see the obvious stuff as beautiful: women, spring nights, music when it's dark, the ocean. I miss the little things, like 'silver-snarling trumpets.' I might end up being smart, but I'll never write great poems." They drove into Princeton while the sunset was painting the sky behind the grad school, and rushed off to a shower to wake them up, since they wouldn't be getting any sleep.

By noon the bright-costumed alumni crowded the streets with their bands and choruses, and in the tents there was great reunion under the orange-and-black banners that curled and strained in the wind. Amory looked long at one house which bore the legend “Sixty-nine	Around lunchtime, the alumni, dressed in colorful outfits, filled the streets with their bands and singing groups. Inside the tents, there was a big reunion happening under the orange and black banners that were waving and pulling in the wind. Amory stared for a while at one house that had "Sixty-Nine" written on it.

There a few gray-haired men sat and talked quietly while the classes swept by in panorama of life.	Some older guys sat and chatted quietly while students hurried past, a real slice of life.

Then tragedy’s emerald eyes glared suddenly at Amory over the edge of June. On the night after his ride to Lawrenceville a crowd sallied to New York in quest of adventure, and started back to Princeton about twelve o’clock in two machines	Suddenly, bad luck hit Amory hard right at the beginning of summer. The night after he went to Lawrenceville, a group went to New York looking for fun and headed back to Princeton around midnight in two cars.

It had been a gay party and different stages of sobriety were represented. Amory was in the car behind; they had taken the wrong road and lost the way, and so were hurrying to catch up	It was a fun party, and everyone was at different levels of drunkenness. Amory was in the car behind us. They'd taken the wrong turn and gotten lost, so they were rushing to catch up.

It was a clear night and the exhilaration of the road went to Amory’s head. He had the ghost of two stanzas of a poem forming in his mind. So the gray car crept nightward in the dark and there was no life stirred as it went by	It was a clear night, and Amory felt great being on the road. He started to think of a couple of lines for a poem. The gray car moved slowly through the dark night, and everything around them was still.

As the still ocean paths before the shark in starred and glittering waterways, beauty-high, the moon-swathed trees divided, pair on pair, while flapping nightbirds cried across the air. A moment by an inn of lamps and shades, a yellow inn under a yellow moon—then silence, where crescendo laughter fades. the car swung out again to the winds of June, mellowed the shadows where the distance grew, then crushed the yellow shadows into blue. They jolted to a stop, and Amory peered up, startled	Like a shark gliding through sparkling ocean paths under the stars, they felt beautiful. The moonlit trees separated in pairs as nightbirds flew by, calling out. Briefly, they passed a cozy inn with lamps and soft light, a yellow inn under a yellow moon. Then, silence as the laughter faded. The car turned back into the windy June night, softening the shadows as they drove further away, then turning the yellow shadows into blue. They stopped suddenly, and Amory looked up, surprised.

A woman was standing beside the road, talking to Alec at the wheel. Afterward he remembered the harpy effect that her old kimono gave her, and the cracked hollowness of her voice as she spoke: “You Princeton boys?” “Yes	A woman was by the road, talking to Alec who was driving. Later, he remembered how her old robe made her look kind of scary, and how her voice sounded hollow and broken when she asked, "You guys from Princeton?" "Yeah."

“Well, there’s one of you killed here, and two others about dead.” “My God!” “Look!” She pointed and they gazed in horror	"Okay, one of you is done for, and two others are practically gone." "Oh my God!" "Look!" She pointed, and they stared in shock.

Under the full light of a roadside arc-light lay a form, face downward in a widening circle of blood. They sprang from the car. Amory thought of the back of that head—that hair—that hair	Someone was lying face down in the road under a streetlight, with blood spreading around them. They jumped out of the car. Amory fixated on the back of their head—that hair—that hair.

and then they turned the form over. “It’s Dick—Dick Humbird!” “Oh, Christ!” “Feel his heart!” Then the insistent voice of the old crone in a sort of croaking triumph: “He’s quite dead, all right	Then they flipped him over. "It's Dick—Dick Humbird!" "Oh, man!" "Check his pulse!" Then the old woman said, her voice raspy and almost excited, "He's definitely dead."

The car turned over. Two of the men that weren’t hurt just carried the others in, but this one’s no use.” Amory rushed into the house and the rest followed with a limp mass that they laid on the sofa in the shoddy little front parlor. Sloane, with his shoulder punctured, was on another lounge	The car flipped. Two guys who weren't injured carried the rest inside, but this one's in bad shape." Amory ran into the house, and everyone else followed, bringing in a lifeless body that they put on the couch in the cheap little living room. Sloane, with a wound in his shoulder, was on another couch.

He was half delirious, and kept calling something about a chemistry lecture at 8:10. “I don’t know what happened,” said Ferrenby in a strained voice	He was almost out of his mind, rambling about a chemistry class at 8:10 AM. "I have no idea what's going on," Ferrenby said, his voice tight.

“Dick was driving and he wouldn’t give up the wheel; we told him he’d been drinking too much—then there was this damn curve—oh, my God!.” He threw himself face downward on the floor and broke into dry sobs	"Dick was driving and wouldn't let anyone else drive. We said he'd had too much to drink, then there was this crazy curve—oh God!" He collapsed on the floor, sobbing without tears.

The doctor had arrived, and Amory went over to the couch, where someone handed him a sheet to put over the body. With a sudden hardness, he raised one of the hands and let it fall back inertly	The doctor was there. Amory walked to the couch. Someone gave him a sheet to cover the body. He picked up one of the dead person's hands, then dropped it. It was limp.

The brow was cold but the face not expressionless. He looked at the shoelaces—Dick had tied them that morning. He had tied them—and now he was this heavy white mass	His forehead was cold, but his face still showed something. He stared at his shoelaces. Dick had tied them for him that morning. Dick had tied them—and now he was just this heavy, white body.

All that remained of the charm and personality of the Dick Humbird he had known—oh, it was all so horrible and unaristocratic and close to the earth. All tragedy has that strain of the grotesque and squalid—so useless, futile	The Dick Humbird he knew, with all his charm and personality, was gone. It was awful, so low-class and down-to-earth. All tragedy has something ugly, messy, and pointless about it.

the way animals die. Amory was reminded of a cat that had lain horribly mangled in some alley of his childhood. “Someone go to Princeton with Ferrenby	Like animals suffer when they die. Amory remembered a cat, badly hurt in an alley when he was a kid. "Does anyone here know Ferrenby from Princeton?"

Amory stepped outside the door and shivered slightly at the late night wind—a wind that stirred a broken fender on the mass of bent metal to a plaintive, tinny sound.	Amory went outside and felt a slight chill from the late night wind. The wind made a broken car fender on a pile of wrecked cars create a sad, metallic noise.

Next day, by a merciful chance, passed in a whirl. When Amory was by himself his thoughts zigzagged inevitably to the picture of that red mouth yawning incongruously in the white face, but with a determined effort he piled present excitement upon the memory of it and shut it coldly away from his mind	The next day flew by, thankfully. Whenever Amory was alone, he couldn't help but think about that red mouth looking strange and out of place on her pale face. But he tried hard to focus on what was happening right now and push that image out of his head.

Isabelle and her mother drove into town at four, and they rode up smiling Prospect Avenue, through the gay crowd, to have tea at Cottage. The clubs had their annual dinners that night, so at seven he loaned her to a freshman and arranged to meet her in the gymnasium at eleven, when the upper classmen were admitted to the freshman dance. She was all he had expected, and he was happy and eager to make that night the centre of every dream. At nine the upper classes stood in front of the clubs as the freshman torchlight parade rioted past, and Amory wondered if the dress-suited groups against the dark, stately backgrounds and under the flare of the torches made the night as brilliant to the staring, cheering freshmen as it had been to him the year before	Isabelle and her mom arrived downtown around four. They drove up Prospect Avenue, waving and smiling, enjoying the lively crowd, heading to Cottage for tea. The clubs were having their yearly dinners that night, so at seven, he let her go with a freshman. They planned to meet at the gym at eleven, when older students could join the freshman dance. She was exactly as he’d imagined, and he felt great, hoping this night would become the best memory ever. At nine, older students stood outside their clubs watching the noisy freshman torch parade go by. Amory wondered if the guys in suits standing in front of the grand buildings, lit by the torches, seemed as impressive and exciting to the freshmen as it had to him last year.

The next day was another whirl. They lunched in a gay party of six in a private dining-room at the club, while Isabelle and Amory looked at each other tenderly over the fried chicken and knew that their love was to be eternal. They danced away the prom until five, and the stags cut in on Isabelle with joyous abandon, which grew more and more enthusiastic as the hour grew late, and their wines, stored in overcoat pockets in the coat room, made old weariness wait until another day. The stag line is a most homogeneous mass of men	The next day was a blur of activity. They had a fun lunch with six people in a private room at the club. Isabelle and Amory looked at each other lovingly over lunch, sure their love would last forever. They danced all night at the prom until five in the morning. Guys kept cutting in to dance with Isabelle, having a blast, and getting more and more excited as the night went on. The drinks they snuck in, hidden in their coats, kept them going until morning. A group of guys looking for a dance is a pretty uniform thing.

It fairly sways with a single soul. A dark-haired beauty dances by and there is a half-gasping sound as the ripple surges forward and someone sleeker than the rest darts out and cuts in. Then when the six-foot girl (brought by Kaye in your class, and to whom he has been trying to introduce you all evening) gallops by, the line surges back and the groups face about and become intent on far corners of the hall, for Kaye, anxious and perspiring, appears elbowing through the crowd in search of familiar faces	The dance floor feels like it's moving with one single energy. A pretty girl with dark hair dances past, and everyone makes a little excited noise as the crowd surges forward. Someone cooler than the rest quickly jumps in and cuts in on her dance. Then, when that really tall girl (Kaye brought her, she's in your class, and he's been trying to get you to meet her all night) rushes by, the crowd pulls back, and everyone turns to face the walls, pretending to be interested in something else. Kaye looks stressed and sweaty as he pushes through the crowd, searching for people he knows.

“I say, old man, I’ve got an awfully nice—” “Sorry, Kaye, but I’m set for this one. I’ve got to cut in on a fella	"Hey man, I was about to say I found someone really cool—" "Sorry, Kaye, but I'm already dancing with this one. I need to cut in on someone."

“Well, the next one?” “What—ah—er—I swear I’ve got to go cut in—look me up when she’s got a dance free.” It delighted Amory when Isabelle suggested that they leave for a while and drive around in her car. For a delicious hour that passed too soon they glided the silent roads about Princeton and talked from the surface of their hearts in shy excitement. Amory felt strangely ingenuous and made no attempt to kiss her	"Okay, who's next to dance with you?" "Wait - uh - I really need to cut in soon. Find me when she's not dancing." Amory was thrilled when Isabelle suggested they leave the party and go for a drive in her car. They drove around the quiet roads near Princeton for an amazing hour that went by too fast, and they talked openly and excitedly. Amory felt surprisingly innocent and didn't try to kiss her.

Next day they rode up through the Jersey country, had luncheon in New York, and in the afternoon went to see a problem play at which Isabelle wept all through the second act, rather to Amory’s embarrassment—though it filled him with tenderness to watch her. He was tempted to lean over and kiss away her tears, and she slipped her hand into his under cover of darkness to be pressed softly. Then at six they arrived at the Borgés’ summer place on Long Island, and Amory rushed upstairs to change into a dinner coat. As he put in his studs he realized that he was enjoying life as he would probably never enjoy it again	The next day, they went for a drive in New Jersey, had lunch in New York City, and then saw a serious play. Isabelle cried the entire second act, which made Amory a little uncomfortable, but he also felt very affectionate towards her. He wanted to kiss her tears away, and she secretly put her hand in his so he could gently squeeze it. At six, they got to the Borgés' summer house on Long Island, and Amory hurried up to change into a suit jacket for dinner. While getting dressed, he understood that he was having a great time, possibly the best time he would ever have.

Everything was hallowed by the haze of his own youth. He had arrived, abreast of the best in his generation at Princeton. He was in love and his love was returned	His youth made everything seem special and important. He'd made it, keeping up with the top students at Princeton. He was in love, and she loved him back.

Turning on all the lights, he looked at himself in the mirror, trying to find in his own face the qualities that made him see clearer than the great crowd of people, that made him decide firmly, and able to influence and follow his own will. There was little in his life now that he would have changed	He flipped on all the lights and stared at himself in the mirror. He was searching his own face for the reasons why he felt he understood things better than everyone else, why he could make strong decisions, and why he was able to control his own life and do what he wanted. Looking back, he wouldn't change much about how he'd lived.

Oxford might have been a bigger field. Silently he admired himself. How conveniently well he looked, and how well a dinner coat became him. He stepped into the hall and then waited at the top of the stairs, for he heard footsteps coming	Oxford could have offered him more. He quietly thought he looked good. He noticed how handsome he was and how good he looked in a dinner jacket. He went into the hall and waited at the top of the stairs because he heard someone coming up.

It was Isabelle, and from the top of her shining hair to her little golden slippers she had never seemed so beautiful. “Isabelle!” he cried, half involuntarily, and held out his arms. As in the storybooks, she ran into them, and on that half-minute, as their lips first touched, rested the high point of vanity, the crest of his young egotism.	It was Isabelle, and she looked stunning from head to toe. "Isabelle!" he blurted out, almost without thinking, and reached for her. Just like in a fairy tale, she ran to him, and that first kiss made him feel incredibly proud and full of himself.

“Ouch! Let me go!” He dropped his arms to his sides. “What’s the matter?” “Your shirt stud—it hurt me—look!” She was looking down at her neck, where a little blue spot about the size of a pea marred its pallor	"Ow! Let go!" He lowered his arms. "What's wrong?" "Your shirt button—it poked me—look!" She pointed to a small blue mark on her pale neck, about the size of a pea.

“Oh, Isabelle,” he reproached himself, “I’m a goopher. Really, I’m sorry—I shouldn’t have held you so close.” She looked up impatiently. “Oh, Amory, of course you couldn’t help it, and it didn’t hurt much; but what are we going to do about it?” “Do about it?” he asked	"Oh, Isabelle," he thought, feeling guilty, "I bring bad luck. Seriously, I'm sorry—I shouldn't have held you so tight." She looked up, annoyed. "Amory, of course you couldn't help it, and it wasn't a big deal; but what are we going to do now?" "Do about what?" he asked.

“Oh—that spot; it’ll disappear in a second.” “It isn’t,” she said, after a moment of concentrated gazing, “it’s still there—and it looks like Old Nick—oh, Amory, what’ll we do! It’s just the height of your shoulder.” “Massage it,” he suggested, repressing the faintest inclination to laugh. She rubbed it delicately with the tips of her fingers, and then a tear gathered in the corner of her eye, and slid down her cheek	"Oh, that mark? It'll be gone in a flash." "No, it won't," she said, after staring at it intensely for a bit. "It's still there, and it looks like the devil himself! Oh, Amory, what are we going to do? It's right on your shoulder." "Rub it," he said, trying not to laugh at all. She gently rubbed it with her fingertips, and then a tear welled up in her eye and rolled down her face.

“Oh, Amory,” she said despairingly, lifting up a most pathetic face, “I’ll just make my whole neck flame if I rub it. What’ll I do?” A quotation sailed into his head and he couldn’t resist repeating it aloud. “All the perfumes of Arabia will not whiten this little hand	"Oh, Amory," she said, sounding really upset and looking sad, "If I rub my neck, it'll just get even redder. What should I do?" Amory thought of a quote and couldn't help saying it out loud: "All the perfumes in the world can't make this little hand white again."

She looked up and the sparkle of the tear in her eye was like ice. “You’re not very sympathetic.” Amory mistook her meaning. “Isabelle, darling, I think it’ll—” “Don’t touch me!” she cried	She looked up, and the tear in her eye shone like ice. "You're not being understanding," she said. Amory misunderstood. "Isabelle, honey, I think it will—" "Don't touch me!" she yelled.

“Haven’t I enough on my mind and you stand there and laugh!” Then he slipped again. “Well, it is funny, Isabelle, and we were talking the other day about a sense of humor being—” She was looking at him with something that was not a smile, rather the faint, mirthless echo of a smile, in the corners of her mouth	"Don't I have enough to worry about without you laughing at me!" He messed up again. "Okay, but it's kind of funny, Isabelle. We were just talking about how important it is to have a sense of humor..." She stared at him, not really smiling. It was more like a weak, sad imitation of a smile at the edges of her lips.

“Oh, shut up!” she cried suddenly, and fled down the hallway toward her room. Amory stood there, covered with remorseful confusion. “Damn!” When Isabelle reappeared she had thrown a light wrap about her shoulders, and they descended the stairs in a silence that endured through dinner. “Isabelle,” he began rather testily, as they arranged themselves in the car, bound for a dance at the Greenwich Country Club, “you’re angry, and I’ll be, too, in a minute	"Just be quiet!" she blurted out, and ran down the hall to her room. Amory was left standing there, feeling guilty and confused. "Damn it!" When Isabelle came back, she had a light shawl over her shoulders, and they went downstairs in total silence, which lasted through dinner. "Isabelle," he started, sounding annoyed, as they got into the car to go to a dance at the Greenwich Country Club, "you're mad, and I'm going to be mad too in a second."

Let’s kiss and make up.” Isabelle considered glumly. “I hate to be laughed at,” she said finally. “I won’t laugh any more	"Let's kiss and forget this." Isabelle thought, feeling down. "I hate being made fun of," she said. "I promise I won't laugh again."

I’m not laughing now, am I?” “You did.” “Oh, don’t be so darned feminine.” Her lips curled slightly. “I’ll be anything I want	Am I laughing now?” “You were.” “Hey, don't be so girly." She smiled a little. “I'll be whatever I want to be."

Amory kept his temper with difficulty. He became aware that he had not an ounce of real affection for Isabelle, but her coldness piqued him	Amory barely kept from getting angry. He realized he didn't actually care about Isabelle, but her being so distant annoyed him.

He wanted to kiss her, kiss her a lot, because then he knew he could leave in the morning and not care. On the contrary, if he didn’t kiss her, it would worry him. It would interfere vaguely with his idea of himself as a conqueror	He really wanted to kiss her, like, a lot. If he did, he figured he could leave the next day without giving it a second thought. But if he didn't kiss her, it would bother him and mess with his whole image of being a guy who gets what he wants.

It wasn’t dignified to come off second best, pleading, with a doughty warrior like Isabelle. Perhaps she suspected this. At any rate, Amory watched the night that should have been the consummation of romance glide by with great moths overhead and the heavy fragrance of roadside gardens, but without those broken words, those little sighs. Afterward they suppered on ginger ale and devil’s food in the pantry, and Amory announced a decision	Losing to someone strong like Isabelle, and having to beg, felt embarrassing. Maybe she knew that. Anyway, Amory spent a night that should have been romantic watching moths fly around and smelling the strong scent of flowers, but without any whispered confessions or soft sighs. Later, they ate ginger ale and chocolate cake in the kitchen, and Amory said what he'd decided.

“I’m leaving early in the morning.” “Why?” “Why not?” he countered. “There’s no need.” “However, I’m going	"I'm leaving early tomorrow." "Why?" "Why shouldn't I?" he replied. "You don't have to." "Still, I'm going."

“Well, if you insist on being ridiculous—” “Oh, don’t put it that way,” he objected. “—just because I won’t let you kiss me	"Okay, if you're going to act silly—" "Hey, don't say it like that," he said. "—just because I'm not letting you kiss me."

Do you think—” “Now, Isabelle,” he interrupted, “you know it’s not that—even suppose it is. We’ve reached the stage where we either ought to kiss—or—or—nothing. It isn’t as if you were refusing on moral grounds	"Do you think—" "Listen, Isabelle," he cut her off. "You know it's not like that—even if it is. We're at the point where we should either kiss—or just do nothing. It's not like you're saying no because it's wrong."

She hesitated. “I really don’t know what to think about you,” she began, in a feeble, perverse attempt at conciliation. “You’re so funny.” “How?” “Well, I thought you had a lot of self-confidence and all that; remember you told me the other day that you could do anything you wanted, or get anything you wanted?” Amory flushed	She paused. "I'm not sure what to make of you," she said, trying weakly to make things better. "You're so weird." "How so?" "Well, I thought you were really confident and stuff; remember the other day you said you could do or get anything you wanted?" Amory blushed.

He had told her a lot of things. “Yes.” “Well, you didn’t seem to feel so self-confident tonight. Maybe you’re just plain conceited	He'd said a lot to her. "Yeah." "Well, you didn't seem so sure of yourself tonight. Maybe you're just full of yourself."

“No, I’m not,” he hesitated. “At Princeton—” “Oh, you and Princeton! You’d think that was the world, the way you talk! Perhaps you can write better than anybody else on your old Princetonian; maybe the freshmen do think you’re important—” “You don’t understand—” “Yes, I do,” she interrupted	"No, I'm not," he paused. "At Princeton—" "Ugh, you're always talking about Princeton! You act like it's everything! Maybe you're a great writer about those old Princeton guys. Maybe the new students think you're a big deal—" "You don't get it—" "Yes, I do," she cut him off.

“I do, because you’re always talking about yourself and I used to like it; now I don’t.” “Have I tonight?” “That’s just the point,” insisted Isabelle. “You got all upset tonight	"Yeah, because you always talk about yourself, and I used to like that, but now I don't." "Did I do that tonight?" "That's exactly what I mean," Isabelle said. "You got all worked up tonight."

You just sat and watched my eyes. Besides, I have to think all the time I’m talking to you—you’re so critical.” “I make you think, do I?” Amory repeated with a touch of vanity. “You’re a nervous strain”—this emphatically—“and when you analyze every little emotion and instinct I just don’t have ’em	You just stared at me. Plus, I have to really think when I talk to you because you're so judgmental." "I make you think, huh?" Amory said, sounding a little proud. "You're exhausting"—and I mean it—"because you overthink every feeling and instinct, and I just don't do that."

“I know.” Amory admitted her point and shook his head helplessly	"I get it," Amory said, agreeing with her. He shook his head, feeling lost.

“Let’s go.” She stood up. He rose abstractedly and they walked to the foot of the stairs. “What train can I get?” “There’s one about 9:11 if you really must go	"Let's go." She stood up. He got up, lost in thought, and they walked to the bottom of the stairs. "What train can I catch?" "There's one around 9:11 if you really have to leave."

“Yes, I’ve got to go, really. Good night	Yeah, I really gotta go. Night.

“Good night.” They were at the head of the stairs, and as Amory turned into his room he thought he caught just the faintest cloud of discontent in her face	"Good night." They were at the top of the stairs, and as Amory went into his room, he thought he saw a tiny hint of unhappiness on her face.

He lay awake in the darkness and wondered how much he cared—how much of his sudden unhappiness was hurt vanity—whether he was, after all, temperamentally unfitted for romance. When he awoke, it was with a glad flood of consciousness. The early wind stirred the chintz curtains at the windows and he was idly puzzled not to be in his room at Princeton with his school football picture over the bureau and the Triangle Club on the wall opposite. Then the grandfather’s clock in the hall outside struck eight, and the memory of the night before came to him	He couldn't sleep, lying in the dark, trying to figure out how much he really cared. Was his sadness just a bruised ego? Was he just not made for love? When he finally woke up, he felt surprisingly good. The morning breeze moved the curtains, and for a moment, he was confused that he wasn't in his dorm room at Princeton, with his football photo above the dresser and the Triangle Club poster on the wall. Then the grandfather clock in the hall struck eight, and he remembered everything from the night before.

He was out of bed, dressing, like the wind; he must get out of the house before he saw Isabelle. What had seemed a melancholy happening, now seemed a tiresome anticlimax. He was dressed at half past, so he sat down by the window; felt that the sinews of his heart were twisted somewhat more than he had thought	He jumped out of bed and got dressed super fast. He had to leave the house before he saw Isabelle. What had felt like a sad event now just seemed like a boring letdown. He was ready by half past the hour, so he sat by the window and realized he was more heartbroken than he'd admitted.

What an ironic mockery the morning seemed!—bright and sunny, and full of the smell of the garden; hearing Mrs. Borgé’s voice in the sun-parlor below, he wondered where was Isabelle	The morning felt like a cruel joke. It was bright and sunny, the garden smelled great, and he could hear Mrs. Borgé downstairs. All he could think was, "Where's Isabelle?"

There was a knock at the door. “The car will be around at ten minutes of nine, sir	Someone knocked on the door. "The car will be here at 8:50, sir."

He returned to his contemplation of the outdoors, and began repeating over and over, mechanically, a verse from Browning, which he had once quoted to Isabelle in a letter: “Each life unfulfilled, you see, It hangs still, patchy and scrappy; We have not sighed deep, laughed free, Starved, feasted, despaired—been happy.” But his life would not be unfulfilled	He went back to looking outside and started repeating a line from Browning, something he'd written to Isabelle: "Every life that doesn't reach its full potential, you see, stays unfinished and incomplete. We haven't really felt things – like deep sadness, true joy, hunger, satisfaction, hopelessness, or happiness.” But his life wouldn't be like that.

He took a sombre satisfaction in thinking that perhaps all along she had been nothing except what he had read into her; that this was her high point, that no one else would ever make her think. Yet that was what she had objected to in him; and Amory was suddenly tired of thinking, thinking! “Damn her!” he said bitterly, “she’s spoiled my year!”	He got a dark kind of pleasure from the idea that maybe she was only ever what he imagined her to be. Maybe this was as good as she'd ever get, and nobody else would ever make her think deeply. But that was exactly what she didn't like about him. Amory was suddenly exhausted with thinking. "Damn it!" he said, feeling angry. "She's ruined my whole year!"

On a dusty day in September Amory arrived in Princeton and joined the sweltering crowd of conditioned men who thronged the streets. It seemed a stupid way to commence his upper-class years, to spend four hours a morning in the stuffy room of a tutoring school, imbibing the infinite boredom of conic sections. Mr. Rooney, pander to the dull, conducted the class and smoked innumerable Pall Malls as he drew diagrams and worked equations from six in the morning until midnight	One hot September day, Amory got to Princeton and joined the sweaty, prepped guys packing the streets. It felt dumb to start college this way, wasting four hours every morning in a stuffy tutoring room, learning boring math. Mr. Rooney, who helped the slow learners, taught the class and chain-smoked Pall Malls while drawing diagrams and solving equations from six AM until midnight.

“Now, Langueduc, if I used that formula, where would my A point be?” Langueduc lazily shifts his six-foot-three of football material and tries to concentrate. “Oh—ah—I’m damned if I know, Mr. Rooney	"Okay, Langueduc, using that method, where's point A?" Langueduc, a big football player, moves around and tries to focus. "Uh... I have no idea, Mr. Rooney."

“Oh, why of course, of course you can’t use that formula. That’s what I wanted you to say.” “Why, sure, of course.” “Do you see why?” “You bet—I suppose so	"Oh, yeah, obviously you can't use that method. That's what I wanted you to realize." "Yeah, definitely, of course." "Get it?" "Totally—I guess so."

“If you don’t see, tell me. I’m here to show you.” “Well, Mr. Rooney, if you don’t mind, I wish you’d go over that again	"If you don't get it, tell me. I'm here to explain it." "Okay, Mr. Rooney, could you please go over that again?"

“Gladly. Now here’s ‘A’.” The room was a study in stupidity—two huge stands for paper, Mr. Rooney in his shirtsleeves in front of them, and slouched around on chairs, a dozen men: Fred Sloane, the pitcher, who absolutely had to get eligible; “Slim” Langueduc, who would beat Yale this fall, if only he could master a poor fifty percent; McDowell, gay young sophomore, who thought it was quite a sporting thing to be tutoring here with all these prominent athletes. “Those poor birds who haven’t a cent to tutor, and have to study during the term are the ones I pity,” he announced to Amory one day, with a flaccid camaraderie in the droop of the cigarette from his pale lips	"Sure. Okay, let's start with 'A'." The room felt incredibly dumb. There were two giant stands for papers, Mr. Rooney in his shirt, and a bunch of guys lounging in chairs: Fred Sloane, the pitcher, who really needed to pass; "Slim" Langueduc, who could win against Yale if he just got a C average; McDowell, a cheerful sophomore, thought it was cool to be tutored alongside all these famous athletes. "I feel bad for the students who can't afford tutoring and actually have to study during the semester," he told Amory one day, with a limp cigarette hanging from his lips trying to sound friendly.

“I should think it would be such a bore, there’s so much else to do in New York during the term. I suppose they don’t know what they miss, anyhow.” There was such an air of “you and I” about Mr. McDowell that Amory very nearly pushed him out of the open window when he said this.	"It must be so boring. There's so much more to do in New York while school's in session. I guess they don't even realize what they're missing." Mr. McDowell was acting like he and Amory were so special and in-the-know that Amory almost shoved him out the window.

Next February his mother would wonder why he didn’t make a club and increase his allowance. simple little nut	Next February, his mom would be confused why he hadn't joined a club to get more money. What a simpleton.

Through the smoke and the air of solemn, dense earnestness that filled the room would come the inevitable helpless cry: “I don’t get it! Repeat that, Mr. Rooney!” Most of them were so stupid or careless that they wouldn’t admit when they didn’t understand, and Amory was of the latter. He found it impossible to study conic sections; something in their calm and tantalizing respectability breathing defiantly through Mr. Rooney’s fetid parlors distorted their equations into insoluble anagrams.	In the smoky, serious atmosphere of the room, someone would always yell, "I don't understand! Say that again, Mr. Rooney!" Most of the students were too dumb or lazy to admit they were lost, and Amory was one of them. He just couldn't understand conic sections. Something about their boring perfection, mixed with Mr. Rooney's gross classroom, turned the problems into puzzles he couldn't solve.

He made a last night’s effort with the proverbial wet towel, and then blissfully took the exam, wondering unhappily why all the color and ambition of the spring before had faded out. Somehow, with the defection of Isabelle the idea of undergraduate success had loosed its grasp on his imagination, and he contemplated a possible failure to pass off his condition with equanimity, even though it would arbitrarily mean his removal from the Princetonian board and the slaughter of his chances for the Senior Council. There was always his luck	He tried to pull himself together like you're supposed to, but basically gave up and took the exam. He was bummed because all the excitement and drive he had last spring was gone. Losing Isabelle made him stop caring so much about being successful in college. He calmly accepted that he might fail, even though it would kick him off the Princetonian newspaper and ruin his chances of getting on the Senior Council. But, he figured, he's always been lucky.

He yawned, scribbled his honor pledge on the cover, and sauntered from the room. “If you don’t pass it,” said the newly arrived Alec as they sat on the window-seat of Amory’s room and mused upon a scheme of wall decoration, “you’re the world’s worst goopher. Your stock will go down like an elevator at the club and on the campus	He yawned, quickly signed the test, and walked out of the room. "If you fail," said Alec, who had just arrived. They were sitting by the window in Amory's room, brainstorming ideas for decorating the walls. "You'll be super unlucky. Your reputation will crash at the club and on campus."

“Oh, hell, I know it. Why rub it in?” “ ’Cause you deserve it. Anybody that’d risk what you were in line for ought to be ineligible for Princetonian chairman	"Damn, I get it. Why make it worse?" "Because you earned it. Anyone who'd throw away what you were about to get shouldn't be allowed to be chairman of the *Daily Princetonian*."

“Oh, drop the subject,” Amory protested. “Watch and wait and shut up. I don’t want everyone at the club asking me about it, as if I were a prize potato being fattened for a vegetable show.” One evening a week later Amory stopped below his own window on the way to Renwick’s, and, seeing a light, called up: “Oh, Tom, any mail?” Alec’s head appeared against the yellow square of light	"Come on, stop talking about it," Amory said. "Just watch, wait, and be quiet. I don't want everyone at the club asking me about it, like I'm some kind of prize vegetable being grown for a contest." About a week later, Amory was heading to Renwick's and stopped under his window. He saw a light and called up, "Hey Tom, any mail for me?" Alec's head popped up in the yellow light.

“Yes, your result’s here.” His heart clamored violently	"Yep, your results came in." His heart pounded like crazy.

“What is it, blue or pink?” “Don’t know. Better come up.” He walked into the room and straight over to the table, and then suddenly noticed that there were other people in the room. “ ’Lo, Kerry	"Boy or girl?" "Don't know yet. You should come see." He went into the room, walked right to the table, and then realized other people were there. "Hey, Kerry."

He was most polite. “Ah, men of Princeton.” They seemed to be mostly friends, so he picked up the envelope marked “Registrar’s Office,” and weighed it nervously. “We have here quite a slip of paper	He was very polite. "Oh, you're from Princeton." They looked like friends, so he grabbed the envelope labeled "Registrar's Office" and nervously felt its weight. "We've got a little piece of paper here."

“Open it, Amory.” “Just to be dramatic, I’ll let you know that if it’s blue, my name is withdrawn from the editorial board of the Prince, and my short career is over.” He paused, and then saw for the first time Ferrenby’s eyes, wearing a hungry look and watching him eagerly	"Open it, Amory." "Just to be dramatic, I'm warning you, if it's a rejection slip, I quit the *Prince* newspaper, and I'm done." He stopped talking, and noticed Ferrenby staring at him, looking really eager and kind of desperate.

Amory returned the gaze pointedly. “Watch my face, gentlemen, for the primitive emotions.” He tore it open and held the slip up to the light	Amory looked right back at them. "Check out my expression, guys, for some real raw feelings." He ripped it open and held the paper up to the light.

“Well?” “Pink or blue?” “Say what it is.” “We’re all ears, Amory	"So?" "Boy or girl?" "Just tell us." "We're listening, Amory."

“Smile or swear—or something.” There was a pause	"Smile, curse, or do something!" He stopped talking.

a small crowd of seconds swept by. then he looked again and another crowd went on into time. “Blue as the sky, gentlemen.”	A few assistants hurried past. Then he looked again and saw another group disappear into the past. "Gentlemen, it's incredibly blue."

What Amory did that year from early September to late in the spring was so purposeless and inconsecutive that it seems scarcely worth recording. He was, of course, immediately sorry for what he had lost	What Amory did that year, from the beginning of September to late spring, was so aimless and disorganized it's hardly worth writing down. Of course, he instantly regretted what he'd thrown away.

His philosophy of success had tumbled down upon him, and he looked for the reasons. “Your own laziness,” said Alec later. “No—something deeper than that. I’ve begun to feel that I was meant to lose this chance	His ideas about how to succeed had completely failed, and he was trying to figure out why. "You're just lazy," Alec said later. "No, it's more than that. I'm starting to think I was supposed to fail at this."

“They’re rather off you at the club, you know; every man that doesn’t come through makes our crowd just so much weaker.” “I hate that point of view.” “Of course, with a little effort you could still stage a comeback.” “No—I’m through—as far as ever being a power in college is concerned	"People at the club are pretty disappointed in you, you know. Every guy who flakes out makes our group look worse." "I can't stand that attitude." "Of course, if you tried, you could still get back in their good graces." "No, I'm done. I'll never be important on campus again."

“But, Amory, honestly, what makes me the angriest isn’t the fact that you won’t be chairman of the Prince and on the Senior Council, but just that you didn’t get down and pass that exam.” “Not me,” said Amory slowly; “I’m mad at the concrete thing. My own idleness was quite in accord with my system, but the luck broke	"Honestly, Amory, what pisses me off most isn't that you're not head of the *Prince* or on the Senior Council. It's just that you didn't bother to pass that exam." "I disagree," Amory said slowly. "I'm angry about the specific result. Being lazy was fine with my philosophy, but I had bad luck."

“Your system broke, you mean.” “Maybe	"You crashed," he said. "Maybe."

“Well, what are you going to do? Get a better one quick, or just bum around for two more years as a has-been?” “I don’t know yet.” “Oh, Amory, buck up!” “Maybe.” Amory’s point of view, though dangerous, was not far from the true one	"So, what's the plan? Find another girl fast, or just waste the next two years feeling like a loser?" "I'm not sure yet." "Come on, Amory, cheer up!" "Maybe." Even though it was risky, Amory's way of thinking wasn't that wrong.

If his reactions to his environment could be tabulated, the chart would have appeared like this, beginning with his earliest years: The fundamental Amory. Amory plus Beatrice. Amory plus Beatrice plus Minneapolis	If you charted how he reacted to things around him, it would look like this, starting from when he was little: Basic Amory. Amory plus Beatrice. Amory plus Beatrice plus Minneapolis.

Then St. Regis’ had pulled him to pieces and started him over again: Amory plus St. Regis’. Amory plus St. Regis’ plus Princeton.	Then St. Regis' school had taken him apart and rebuilt him: Amory, shaped by St. Regis'. Amory, shaped by St. Regis' and now Princeton.

That had been his nearest approach to success through conformity. The fundamental Amory, idle, imaginative, rebellious, had been nearly snowed under	He almost succeeded by just fitting in. His real self – lazy, creative, and defiant – was almost completely buried.

He had conformed, he had succeeded, but as his imagination was neither satisfied nor grasped by his own success, he had listlessly, half-accidentally chucked the whole thing and become again: The fundamental Amory.	He'd played the game, he'd won, but because his success didn't excite him or fulfill his dreams, he'd carelessly, almost without thinking, thrown it all away and gone back to being: Just Amory.

His father died quietly and inconspicuously at Thanksgiving. The incongruity of death with either the beauties of Lake Geneva or with his mother’s dignified, reticent attitude diverted him, and he looked at the funeral with an amused tolerance	His dad passed away peacefully and without much fuss at Thanksgiving. The strange contrast between death and the beautiful scenery of Lake Geneva, or even his mom's calm and reserved behavior, distracted him. He viewed the funeral with detached amusement.

He decided that burial was after all preferable to cremation, and he smiled at his old boyhood choice, slow oxidation in the top of a tree. The day after the ceremony he was amusing himself in the great library by sinking back on a couch in graceful mortuary attitudes, trying to determine whether he would, when his day came, be found with his arms crossed piously over his chest (Monsignor Darcy had once advocated this posture as being the most distinguished), or with his hands clasped behind his head, a more pagan and Byronic attitude. What interested him much more than the final departure of his father from things mundane was a tri-cornered conversation between Beatrice, Mr. Barton, of Barton and Krogman, their lawyers, and himself, that took place several days after the funeral.	He figured burying someone was better than burning them. He chuckled, remembering how as a kid, he'd wanted to slowly decompose in a tree. The day after the funeral, he was lounging dramatically on a couch in the big library, pretending to be dead. He was trying to decide if, when he died, he wanted to be found with his arms folded across his chest like a good Catholic (Monsignor Darcy thought that looked the best), or with his hands behind his head, which seemed more rebellious and cool. But honestly, he was much more interested in a three-way talk that had happened a few days after the funeral with Beatrice and Mr. Barton from Barton and Krogman, their lawyers, about something else entirely.

For the first time he came into actual cognizance of the family finances, and realized what a tidy fortune had once been under his father’s management. He took a ledger labelled “1906” and ran through it rather carefully. The total expenditure that year had come to something over one hundred and ten thousand dollars	He finally understood his family's money situation and realized his dad used to control a really good amount of money. He picked up a ledger from 1906 and looked through it pretty thoroughly. They spent over $110,000 that year.

Forty thousand of this had been Beatrice’s own income, and there had been no attempt to account for it: it was all under the heading, “Drafts, checks, and letters of credit forwarded to Beatrice Blaine.” The dispersal of the rest was rather minutely itemized: the taxes and improvements on the Lake Geneva estate had come to almost nine thousand dollars; the general upkeep, including Beatrice’s electric and a French car, bought that year, was over thirty-five thousand dollars	Forty thousand of that money was Beatrice's own income, and they didn't even bother to explain what she spent it on. It was all just labeled "Money sent to Beatrice Blaine." The rest of the money was broken down more carefully: almost nine thousand dollars went to taxes and improvements on the Lake Geneva property, and keeping everything running, including Beatrice's electricity and a new French car she bought that year, cost more than thirty-five thousand dollars.

The rest was fully taken care of, and there were invariably items which failed to balance on the right side of the ledger. In the volume for 1912 Amory was shocked to discover the decrease in the number of bond holdings and the great drop in the income. In the case of Beatrice’s money this was not so pronounced, but it was obvious that his father had devoted the previous year to several unfortunate gambles in oil. Very little of the oil had been burned, but Stephen Blaine had been rather badly singed	Everything else was handled for them, but they always spent more than they made. Looking at the records from 1912, Amory was surprised to see that they owned fewer bonds and their income had dropped a lot. Beatrice's money hadn't been affected as much, but it was clear that his father had lost a lot of money the previous year on some bad investments in oil. They didn't get much oil out of it, and Stephen Blaine lost a lot of money.

The next year and the next and the next showed similar decreases, and Beatrice had for the first time begun using her own money for keeping up the house. Yet her doctor’s bill for 1913 had been over nine thousand dollars. About the exact state of things Mr. Barton was quite vague and confused	The following years kept getting worse financially. Beatrice started using her own money to pay for the house. But in 1913, her medical bills were over nine thousand dollars. Mr. Barton was unclear and confused about their true financial situation.

There had been recent investments, the outcome of which was for the present problematical, and he had an idea there were further speculations and exchanges concerning which he had not been consulted. It was not for several months that Beatrice wrote Amory the full situation. The entire residue of the Blaine and O’Hara fortunes consisted of the place at Lake Geneva and approximately a half million dollars, invested now in fairly conservative six-per-cent holdings	He'd made some investments recently, but it wasn't clear if they'd pay off. He suspected there were more deals happening behind his back. Beatrice didn't explain everything until months later. Basically, all that was left of both family fortunes was the house at Lake Geneva and about half a million dollars, now invested in pretty safe, six-percent interest accounts.

In fact, Beatrice wrote that she was putting the money into railroad and streetcar bonds as fast as she could conveniently transfer it. “I am quite sure,” she wrote to Amory, “that if there is one thing we can be positive of, it is that people will not stay in one place. This Ford person has certainly made the most of that idea	Actually, Beatrice wrote that she was investing the money in railroad and streetcar bonds as quickly as she could. "I'm pretty sure," she wrote to Amory, "if we can be certain of anything, it's that people won't stay put. This Ford guy has definitely taken advantage of that."

So I am instructing Mr. Barton to specialize on such things as Northern Pacific and these Rapid Transit Companies, as they call the streetcars	I'm telling Mr. Barton to focus on stuff like Northern Pacific Railroad and those streetcar companies, what they call Rapid Transit.

I shall never forgive myself for not buying Bethlehem Steel. I’ve heard the most fascinating stories	I'll always regret not investing in Bethlehem Steel. I've heard some incredible things about it.

You must go into finance, Amory. I’m sure you would revel in it	Amory, you should go into finance. I bet you'd really enjoy it.

You start as a messenger or a teller, I believe, and from that you go up—almost indefinitely. I’m sure if I were a man I’d love the handling of money; it has become quite a senile passion with me	You usually start as a messenger or cashier, I think, and move up from there—pretty far, actually. I'm sure if I were a guy, I'd love dealing with money; I'm kind of obsessed with it already.

Before I get any farther I want to discuss something. A Mrs. Bispam, an overcordial little lady whom I met at a tea the other day, told me that her son, he is at Yale, wrote her that all the boys there wore their summer underwear all during the winter, and also went about with their heads wet and in low shoes on the coldest days.	Before I go on, I need to talk about something. I met a really friendly, kind of pushy woman, Mrs. Bispam, at a tea party recently. She told me her son, who goes to Yale, wrote to her saying that all the guys there wear their summer underwear all winter long and walk around with wet hair and wearing light shoes even when it's freezing.

Now, Amory, I don’t know whether that is a fad at Princeton too, but I don’t want you to be so foolish. It not only inclines a young man to pneumonia and infantile paralysis, but to all forms of lung trouble, to which you are particularly inclined	Amory, I don't know if it's popular at Princeton, but don't be stupid. Doing that can give you pneumonia, polio, and all sorts of lung problems, which you're already likely to get.

You cannot experiment with your health. I have found that out. I will not make myself ridiculous as some mothers no doubt do, by insisting that you wear overshoes, though I remember one Christmas you wore them around constantly without a single buckle latched, making such a curious swishing sound, and you refused to buckle them because it was not the thing to do. The very next Christmas you would not wear even rubbers, though I begged you	You can't mess around with your health. I learned that the hard way. I'm not going to be like some embarrassing mothers, telling you to wear overshoes all the time. Although, I remember one Christmas you wore them constantly, but never buckled them, making this funny swooshing noise. You wouldn't buckle them because it wasn't cool. Then, the very next Christmas, you wouldn't even wear regular rubber boots, even though I asked you to.

You are nearly twenty years old now, dear, and I can’t be with you constantly to find whether you are doing the sensible thing. “This has been a very practical letter. I warned you in my last that the lack of money to do the things one wants to makes one quite prosy and domestic, but there is still plenty for everything if we are not too extravagant	Honey, you're almost twenty now, and I can't always be there to make sure you're being smart. This letter is pretty serious because I told you last time that not having enough money to do what you want makes you really boring and focused on home stuff. But we still have enough if we don't overspend.

Take care of yourself, my dear boy, and do try to write at least once a week, because I imagine all sorts of horrible things if I don’t hear from you. Affectionately, Mother.”	"Take care, honey, and please write at least once a week. I worry like crazy if I don't hear from you. Love, Mom."

Monsignor Darcy invited Amory up to the Stuart palace on the Hudson for a week at Christmas, and they had enormous conversations around the open fire. Monsignor was growing a trifle stouter and his personality had expanded even with that, and Amory felt both rest and security in sinking into a squat, cushioned chair and joining him in the middle-aged sanity of a cigar. “I’ve felt like leaving college, Monsignor.” “Why?” “All my career’s gone up in smoke; you think it’s petty and all that, but—” “Not at all petty	Over Christmas, Monsignor Darcy invited Amory to his fancy house by the Hudson River for a week. They talked for hours by the fireplace. The Monsignor had gotten a bit fatter, but his personality was even bigger. Amory felt relaxed and safe, sinking into a comfy chair, smoking a cigar with him, and enjoying the stability of older age. "I've been thinking about dropping out of college, Monsignor." "Why?" "My whole future seems ruined. You probably think it's not a big deal, but—" "It's absolutely a big deal.”

I think it’s most important. I want to hear the whole thing. Everything you’ve been doing since I saw you last	It's really important to me. I want to hear everything. What you've been up to since we last met.

Amory talked; he went thoroughly into the destruction of his egotistic highways, and in a half-hour the listless quality had left his voice. “What would you do if you left college?” asked Monsignor	Amory spoke, really digging into how he was tearing down his own selfish ways. After about thirty minutes, he didn't sound so bored anymore. "What would you do if you dropped out of college?" Monsignor asked.

“Don’t know. I’d like to travel, but of course this tiresome war prevents that	"No idea. I'd love to travel, but this annoying war makes it impossible."

Anyways, mother would hate not having me graduate. I’m just at sea	My mom would be really upset if I didn't graduate. I feel lost right now.

Kerry Holiday wants me to go over with him and join the Lafayette Esquadrille.” “You know you wouldn’t like to go	Kerry Holiday wants me to join him and fly with the Lafayette Escadrille." "You know you wouldn't want to do that."

“Sometimes I would—tonight I’d go in a second.” “Well, you’d have to be very much more tired of life than I think you are	"Sometimes I would—tonight, I'd do it right away." "Well, you'd have to be way more sick of living than I believe you are."

I know you.” “I’m afraid you do,” agreed Amory reluctantly	"I know you." "Yeah, I guess you do," Amory admitted, sounding annoyed.

“It just seemed an easy way out of everything—when I think of another useless, draggy year.” “Yes, I know; but to tell you the truth, I’m not worried about you; you seem to me to be progressing perfectly naturally.” “No,” Amory objected	"It felt like an easy escape from everything--especially the thought of another boring, pointless year." "Yeah, I get it; but honestly, I'm not worried about you. You seem to be developing just fine." "No," Amory argued.

“I’ve lost half my personality in a year.” “Not a bit of it!” scoffed Monsignor	"I feel like I've changed completely in just a year." "That's nonsense!" the Monsignor said dismissively.

“You’ve lost a great amount of vanity and that’s all.” “Lordy! I feel, anyway, as if I’d gone through another fifth form at St. Regis’s.” “No.” Monsignor shook his head. “That was a misfortune; this has been a good thing	"You're just less vain, that's it." "Wow! I feel like I've relived another year of high school from hell." "No." The priest disagreed. "That was bad luck; this was good for you."

Whatever worth while comes to you, won’t be through the channels you were searching last year.” “What could be more unprofitable than my present lack of pep?” “Perhaps in itself	Anything good that happens to you won't come from the same places you were looking last year." "What's worse than how unmotivated I am right now?" "Maybe that's

but you’re developing. This has given you time to think and you’re casting off a lot of your old luggage about success and the superman and all. People like us can’t adopt whole theories, as you did. If we can do the next thing, and have an hour a day to think in, we can accomplish marvels, but as far as any high-handed scheme of blind dominance is concerned—we’d just make asses of ourselves	You're growing and changing. This has let you think things through, and you're ditching a lot of your old ideas about success and being superior to everyone. People like us can't just swallow entire belief systems like you used to. If we can focus on what's next and have some quiet time to think each day, we can achieve amazing things. But trying to grab power and blindly control everything? We'd just look ridiculous.

“But, Monsignor, I can’t do the next thing.” “Amory, between you and me, I have only just learned to do it myself. I can do the one hundred things beyond the next thing, but I stub my toe on that, just as you stubbed your toe on mathematics this fall.” “Why do we have to do the next thing? It never seems the sort of thing I should do	"But, Monsignor, I just can't figure out what to do next." "Amory, honestly, I'm barely figuring it out myself. I can handle all the complicated stuff later, but I stumble on this simple thing, just like you struggled with math this semester." "Why do we even need to do this 'next thing'? It never feels like the right thing for me to do."

“We have to do it because we’re not personalities, but personages.” “That’s a good line—what do you mean?” “A personality is what you thought you were, what this Kerry and Sloane you tell me of evidently are. Personality is a physical matter almost entirely; it lowers the people it acts on—I’ve seen it vanish in a long sickness	"We have to do this because we're not just individuals, we're important figures." "That's a good one—what do you mean?" "An individual is what you used to think you were, what these Kerry and Sloane people you mentioned seem to be. Individuality is mostly physical; it has a negative effect on people. I've seen it disappear during a long illness."

But while a personality is active, it overrides ‘the next thing.’ Now a personage, on the other hand, gathers	When someone is focused and doing things, they don't worry about "what's next." But a famous or important person just collects...

He is never thought of apart from what he’s done. He’s a bar on which a thousand things have been hung—glittering things sometimes, as ours are; but he uses those things with a cold mentality back of them	People only think about him in terms of his accomplishments. He's like a display rack holding a bunch of stuff—sometimes shiny, like we are—but he uses everything with a calculating, detached mind.

“And several of my most glittering possessions had fallen off when I needed them.” Amory continued the simile eagerly. “Yes, that’s it; when you feel that your garnered prestige and talents and all that are hung out, you need never bother about anybody; you can cope with them without difficulty	"And a lot of my best stuff disappeared when I actually needed it." Amory kept going, excited. "Yeah, that's right; when you think you've got all this great reputation, skills, and everything, you don't have to worry about anyone. You can handle them easily."

“But, on the other hand, if I haven’t my possessions, I’m helpless!” “Absolutely.” “That’s certainly an idea.” “Now you’ve a clean start—a start Kerry or Sloane can constitutionally never have. You brushed three or four ornaments down, and, in a fit of pique, knocked off the rest of them	"But, if I don't have my stuff, I'm useless!" "Totally." "That's a thought." "Now you've got a fresh beginning—something Kerry or Sloane can never really have. You already messed up a few things, and then, because you were annoyed, you got rid of the rest."

The thing now is to collect some new ones, and the farther you look ahead in the collecting the better. But remember, do the next thing!” “How clear you can make things!” So they talked, often about themselves, sometimes of philosophy and religion, and life as respectively a game or a mystery. The priest seemed to guess Amory’s thoughts before they were clear in his own head, so closely related were their minds in form and groove. “Why do I make lists?” Amory asked him one night	"The goal now is to find new experiences, and the more you plan for the future, the better. But remember, focus on what's next!" "You explain things so well!" They talked like this, often about themselves, sometimes about philosophy, religion, and whether life was a game or a mystery. The priest seemed to know what Amory was thinking even before Amory did, their minds were so similar. "Why do I make lists?" Amory asked him one night.

“Lists of all sorts of things?” “Because you’re a medievalist,” Monsignor answered. “We both are. It’s the passion for classifying and finding a type	"Lists of everything?" "Because you study the Middle Ages," the Monsignor replied. "We both do. It's the love of organizing and figuring things out."

“It’s a desire to get something definite.” “It’s the nucleus of scholastic philosophy.” “I was beginning to think I was growing eccentric till I came up here	"It's wanting something concrete." "It's at the heart of academic thinking." "I thought I was becoming weird until I got here."

It was a pose, I guess.” “Don’t worry about that; for you not posing may be the biggest pose of all	"It was an act, I guess." "Don't sweat it. Maybe the biggest act you put on is trying *not* to act."

Pose—” “Yes?” “But do the next thing.” After Amory returned to college he received several letters from Monsignor which gave him more egotistic food for consumption	"Pose—" "Yeah?" "Just do what's next." After Amory went back to college, he got a few letters from the Monsignor that really boosted his ego.

I am afraid that I gave you too much assurance of your inevitable safety, and you must remember that I did that through faith in your springs of effort; not in the silly conviction that you will arrive without struggle. Some nuances of character you will have to take for granted in yourself, though you must be careful in confessing them to others. You are unsentimental, almost incapable of affection, astute without being cunning and vain without being proud. Don’t let yourself feel worthless; often through life you will really be at your worst when you seem to think best of yourself; and don’t worry about losing your “personality,” as you persist in calling it; at fifteen you had the radiance of early morning, at twenty you will begin to have the melancholy brilliance of the moon, and when you are my age you will give out, as I do, the genial golden warmth of 4 p.m.	I might have made you feel too secure about succeeding. I believed in your ability to work hard, not that you'd get there easily. You'll just have to accept certain things about yourself, but be careful who you tell. You're not emotional, almost unable to love, smart but not sneaky, and confident but not arrogant. Don't think you're useless. Often, when you think you're doing great, you're actually at your worst. And don't stress about losing your "personality," whatever you call it. At fifteen, you were bright and fresh, at twenty you'll be mysteriously beautiful like the moon, and when you're my age, you'll give off a warm, comforting vibe like the late afternoon sun, just like I do.

If you write me letters, please let them be natural ones	If you write me, please just be yourself in your letters.

Your last, that dissertation on architecture, was perfectly awful—so “highbrow” that I picture you living in an intellectual and emotional vacuum; and beware of trying to classify people too definitely into types; you will find that all through their youth they will persist annoyingly in jumping from class to class, and by pasting a supercilious label on everyone you meet you are merely packing a jack-in-the-box that will spring up and leer at you when you begin to come into really antagonistic contact with the world. An idealization of some such a man as Leonardo da Vinci would be a more valuable beacon to you at present	That last paper you wrote about architecture was terrible. It was so pretentious, I imagine you're totally isolated. Also, stop trying to categorize people so strictly. When they're young, they'll keep changing and defying your labels. If you're snobby and judge everyone, you're just setting yourself up for disappointment when you actually have to deal with the real world. Right now, you'd be better off looking up to someone like Leonardo da Vinci as a role model.

You are bound to go up and down, just as I did in my youth, but do keep your clarity of mind, and if fools or sages dare to criticise don’t blame yourself too much. You say that convention is all that really keeps you straight in this “woman proposition”; but it’s more than that, Amory; it’s the fear that what you begin you can’t stop; you would run amuck, and I know whereof I speak; it’s that half-miraculous sixth sense by which you detect evil, it’s the half-realized fear of God in your heart. Whatever your métier proves to be—religion, architecture, literature—I’m sure you would be much safer anchored to the Church, but I won’t risk my influence by arguing with you even though I am secretly sure that the “black chasm of Romanism” yawns beneath you. Do write me soon	You're going to have ups and downs, like I did when I was young. Stay clear-headed, and don't beat yourself up too much if people criticize you, whether they're smart or not. You think social rules are the only thing keeping you in line with women, but it's more than that, Amory. It's the fear that you'll lose control and go crazy. I know what I'm talking about. It's that instinct you have for detecting bad things, and it's also a little bit of fear of God in your heart. Whatever you end up doing—religion, architecture, writing—I think you'd be better off sticking with the Church. But I won't push you, even though I secretly believe you're close to falling into the "dark pit of Catholicism." Write to me soon.

With affectionate regards, Thayer Darcy. Even Amory’s reading paled during this period; he delved further into the misty side streets of literature: Huysmans, Walter Pater, Theophile Gautier, and the racier sections of Rabelais, Boccaccio, Petronius, and Suetonius. One week, through general curiosity, he inspected the private libraries of his classmates and found Sloane’s as typical as any: sets of Kipling, O. Henry, John Fox, Jr	Sincerely, Thayer Darcy. Even Amory's own reading seemed boring compared to what he was reading now. He explored more obscure and edgy books: Huysmans, Walter Pater, Theophile Gautier, and the naughtier parts of Rabelais, Boccaccio, Petronius, and Suetonius. One week, just out of curiosity, he checked out his classmates' personal book collections and found Sloane's to be pretty normal: sets of Kipling, O. Henry, and John Fox, Jr.

, and Richard Harding Davis; What Every Middle-Aged Woman Ought to Know, The Spell of the Yukon; a “gift” copy of James Whitcomb Riley, an assortment of battered, annotated schoolbooks, and, finally, to his surprise, one of his own late discoveries, the collected poems of Rupert Brooke. Together with Tom D’Invilliers, he sought among the lights of Princeton for someone who might found the Great American Poetic Tradition. The undergraduate body itself was rather more interesting that year than had been the entirely Philistine Princeton of two years before. Things had livened surprisingly, though at the sacrifice of much of the spontaneous charm of freshman year	He had books by Richard Harding Davis, "What Every Middle-Aged Woman Ought to Know," and "The Spell of the Yukon." He also had a free copy of James Whitcomb Riley, a bunch of old, marked-up textbooks, and, surprisingly, a book he'd recently discovered: the collected poems of Rupert Brooke. With his friend Tom D'Invilliers, he looked around Princeton for someone who could start a new, great era of American poetry. The students that year were more exciting than the boring Princeton students from two years earlier. Things had gotten much more lively, even though they lost some of the easygoing fun of freshman year.

In the old Princeton they would never have discovered Tanaduke Wylie. Tanaduke was a sophomore, with tremendous ears and a way of saying, “The earth swirls down through the ominous moons of preconsidered generations!” that made them vaguely wonder why it did not sound quite clear, but never question that it was the utterance of a supersoul. At least so Tom and Amory took him. They told him in all earnestness that he had a mind like Shelley’s, and featured his ultrafree free verse and prose poetry in the Nassau Literary Magazine	Back in the old days at Princeton, someone like Tanaduke Wylie would have never been noticed. Tanaduke, a second-year student, had huge ears and a habit of saying things like, "The earth swirls down through the ominous moons of preconsidered generations!" This made people a little confused because it didn't quite make sense, but they still thought it sounded like something a genius would say. At least, that's what Tom and Amory thought. They seriously told him he was as smart as the poet Shelley, and they published his very experimental poetry in the school magazine.

But Tanaduke’s genius absorbed the many colors of the age, and he took to the Bohemian life, to their great disappointment. He talked of Greenwich Village now instead of “noon-swirled moons,” and met winter muses, unacademic, and cloistered by Forty-second Street and Broadway, instead of the Shelleyan dream-children with whom he had regaled their expectant appreciation. So they surrendered Tanaduke to the futurists, deciding that he and his flaming ties would do better there. Tom gave him the final advice that he should stop writing for two years and read the complete works of Alexander Pope four times, but on Amory’s suggestion that Pope for Tanaduke was like foot-ease for stomach trouble, they withdrew in laughter, and called it a coin’s toss whether this genius was too big or too petty for them	Tanaduke was really influenced by what was trendy, and he started living a Bohemian lifestyle, which bummed them out. He used to talk about poetic stuff, but now he was all about Greenwich Village. Instead of dreamy, romantic women, he was hanging out with artsy girls near Times Square. So, they gave up on Tanaduke and figured he'd fit in better with the avant-garde crowd. Tom told him to stop writing for a couple of years and just read Alexander Pope, but Amory said that wouldn't help at all. They all laughed and joked about whether Tanaduke was a genius or just full of himself.

Amory rather scornfully avoided the popular professors who dispensed easy epigrams and thimblefuls of Chartreuse to groups of admirers every night. He was disappointed, too, at the air of general uncertainty on every subject that seemed linked with the pedantic temperament; his opinions took shape in a miniature satire called “In a Lecture-Room,” which he persuaded Tom to print in the Nassau Lit	Amory kind of looked down on the well-liked professors who just tossed out clever sayings and tiny drinks to their fans every night. He was also bummed out by how unsure everyone seemed to be about everything when it came to those overly academic types. He turned his feelings into a short, funny piece called "In a Lecture-Room," and he got Tom to publish it in the Nassau Lit.

“Good morning, Fool. Three times a week You hold us helpless while you speak, Teasing our thirsty souls with the Sleek ‘yeas’ of your philosophy. Well, here we are, your hundred sheep, Tune up, play on, pour forth	"Hey, idiot. Three times a week, you got us hooked when you talk, tempting our eager minds with your smooth, positive ideas. Okay, here we are, all your followers, so start up, go on, tell us everything."

we sleep. You are a student, so they say; You hammered out the other day A syllabus, from what we know Of some forgotten folio; You’d sniffled through an era’s must, Filling your nostrils up with dust, And then, arising from your knees, Published, in one gigantic sneeze. But here’s a neighbor on my right, An Eager Ass, considered bright; Asker of questions. How he’ll stand, With earnest air and fidgy hand, After this hour, telling you He sat all night and burrowed through Your book	We're sleeping. You're supposed to be a student. We heard you quickly threw together a course outline based on some old, dusty book. You dug through a musty old time period, getting dust up your nose, and then, after all that work, you just sneezed out a book. But check out the guy next to me, a real try-hard who thinks he's smart. He's always asking questions. After this, he'll probably come up to you, looking serious and fidgeting, and tell you he stayed up all night reading your book.

Oh, you’ll be coy and he Will simulate precosity, And pedants both, you’ll smile and smirk, And leer, and hasten back to work. ’Twas this day week, sir, you returned A theme of mine, from which I learned (Through various comment on the side Which you had scrawled) that I defied The highest rules of criticism For cheap and careless witticism. ‘Are you quite sure that this could be?’ And ‘Shaw is no authority!’ But Eager Ass, with what he’s sent, Plays havoc with your best percent. Still—still I meet you here and there	You'll act shy, and he'll pretend to be clever. You'll both be know-it-alls, smiling and smirking, leering, and then rushing back to your work. Exactly a week ago today, you returned a paper of mine, from which I realized (from the comments you scribbled all over it) that I had broken all the rules of good criticism by using cheap and lazy jokes. You wrote things like, "Are you sure this is right?" and "Shaw isn't a reliable source!" But this eager idiot, with what he's dishing out, is messing up your top students. And yet, I keep running into you.

When Shakespeare’s played you hold a chair, And some defunct, moth-eaten star Enchants the mental prig you are. A radical comes down and shocks The atheistic orthodox?– You’re representing Common Sense, Mouth open, in the audience. And, sometimes, even chapel lures That conscious tolerance of yours, That broad and beaming view of truth (Including Kant and General Booth.) And so from shock to shock you live, A hollow, pale affirmative	When they put on a Shakespeare play, you're there in your seat. Some washed-up, old-fashioned actor fascinates your intellectual mind. If a rebel comes along and challenges the usual non-believers, you act like you're the voice of reason, just sitting there, listening. Sometimes, you even go to church, showing off how open-minded you are and how you understand everything (even complex stuff). So you go from one surprising thing to another, living a life that seems agreeable but is actually empty.

The hour’s up. and roused from rest One hundred children of the blest Cheat you a word or two with feet That down the noisy aisle-ways beat. Forget on narrow-minded earth The Mighty Yawn that gave you birth.” In April, Kerry Holiday left college and sailed for France to enroll in the Lafayette Esquadrille	Time's up. A hundred lucky kids, woken from their nap, scamper down the noisy halls, taking a few words from you with their hurried steps. Forget the boring world you came from." In April, Kerry Holiday quit college and went to France to join the Lafayette Escadrille.

Amory’s envy and admiration of this step was drowned in an experience of his own to which he never succeeded in giving an appropriate value, but which, nevertheless, haunted him for three years afterward.	Amory was jealous and impressed, but then something happened to him that he never fully understood. Even though he couldn't appreciate it then, it stuck with him for the next three years.

Healy’s they left at twelve and taxied to Bistolary’s. There were Axia Marlowe and Phoebe Column, from the Summer Garden show, Fred Sloane and Amory	They left Healy's place at midnight and took a taxi to Bistolary's. Axia Marlowe, Phoebe Column (from the Summer Garden show), Fred Sloane, and Amory were there.

The evening was so very young that they felt ridiculous with surplus energy, and burst into the café like Dionysian revellers. “Table for four in the middle of the floor,” yelled Phoebe	It was early in the evening, and they had so much energy they felt silly. They rushed into the café like wild party animals. "Table for four, right in the center!" Phoebe shouted.

“Hurry, old dear, tell ’em we’re here!” “Tell ’em to play ‘Admiration’!” shouted Sloane. “You two order; Phoebe and I are going to shake a wicked calf,” and they sailed off in the muddled crowd. Axia and Amory, acquaintances of an hour, jostled behind a waiter to a table at a point of vantage; there they took seats and watched	"Hey, hurry up and let them know we're here!" Sloane yelled. "Tell them to play 'Admiration'!" Then, to someone near him "You two order for us; Phoebe and I are going to dance," and they disappeared into the busy crowd. Axia and Amory, who had just met, followed a waiter to a table with a good view. They sat down and watched.

“There’s Findle Margotson, from New Haven!” she cried above the uproar. “ ’Lo, Findle! Whoo-ee!” “Oh, Axia!” he shouted in salutation	"There's Findle Margotson from New Haven!" she yelled over the noise. "Hey, Findle! Whoo-ee!" "Hey, Axia!" he yelled back.

“C’mon over to our table.” “No!” Amory whispered. “Can’t do it, Findle; I’m with somebody else! Call me up tomorrow about one o’clock!” Findle, a nondescript man-about-Bisty’s, answered incoherently and turned back to the brilliant blonde whom he was endeavoring to steer around the room	"Come join us at our table!" "No way!" Amory muttered. "I can't, Findle, I'm with someone! Call me tomorrow around one!" Findle, just some guy who hangs around Bisty's, mumbled something unclear and went back to trying to guide the stunning blonde he was with through the crowd.

“There’s a natural damn fool,” commented Amory. “Oh, he’s all right. Here’s the old jitney waiter	"Some people are just born idiots," Amory said. "But he's okay. Here comes the waiter."

If you ask me, I want a double Daiquiri.” “Make it four.” The crowd whirled and changed and shifted	"I'll have a double daiquiri." "Make that four." The crowd kept moving and changing.

They were mostly from the colleges, with a scattering of the male refuse of Broadway, and women of two types, the higher of which was the chorus girl. On the whole it was a typical crowd, and their party as typical as any. About three-fourths of the whole business was for effect and therefore harmless, ended at the door of the café, soon enough for the five-o’clock train back to Yale or Princeton; about one-fourth continued on into the dimmer hours and gathered strange dust from strange places	The group was mostly college students, mixed with some guys who hung around Broadway. The women were mainly chorus girls, some classier than others. It was a pretty standard crowd, and the party was nothing special. Most of it, like three-quarters, was just for show and didn't mean anything, ending when they left the cafe, in time to catch the 5 PM train back to Yale or Princeton. But the other quarter kept going late into the night, getting into who-knows-what.

Their party was scheduled to be one of the harmless kind. Fred Sloane and Phoebe Column were old friends; Axia and Amory new ones. But strange things are prepared even in the dead of night, and the unusual, which lurks least in the café, home of the prosaic and inevitable, was preparing to spoil for him the waning romance of Broadway	They planned a low-key, innocent get-together. Fred Sloane and Phoebe Column were longtime friends, while Axia and Amory were recent acquaintances. But even on quiet nights, unexpected stuff happens. Something unusual, the kind of thing you wouldn't expect in a boring, predictable place like a cafe, was about to mess up his fading love affair with the Broadway scene.

The way it took was so inexpressibly terrible, so unbelievable, that afterward he never thought of it as experience; but it was a scene from a misty tragedy, played far behind the veil, and that it meant something definite he knew. About one o’clock they moved to Maxim’s, and two found them in Devinière’s. Sloane had been drinking consecutively and was in a state of unsteady exhilaration, but Amory was quite tiresomely sober; they had run across none of those ancient, corrupt buyers of champagne who usually assisted their New York parties	What happened was so awful and unreal that he didn't even think of it as a real experience. It felt like a sad, unclear play happening in secret, but he knew it meant something important. Around 1 a.m., they went to Maxim's, and by 2 a.m. they were at Devinière's. Sloane had been drinking non-stop and was tipsy and overly excited, but Amory was annoyingly sober. They hadn't run into any of those older, rich guys who usually paid for their champagne back in New York.

They were just through dancing and were making their way back to their chairs when Amory became aware that someone at a nearby table was looking at him. He turned and glanced casually	They had just finished dancing and were heading back to their seats when Amory noticed someone at a table close by was staring at him. He looked over without making it obvious.

a middle-aged man dressed in a brown sack suit, it was, sitting a little apart at a table by himself and watching their party intently. At Amory’s glance he smiled faintly. Amory turned to Fred, who was just sitting down. “Who’s that pale fool watching us?” he complained indignantly	There was a middle-aged guy in a cheap brown suit sitting alone at a table, staring at our group. When I looked at him, he gave a weak smile. I turned to Fred, who was just sitting down, and asked, annoyed, "Who's that weirdo staring at us?"

“Where?” cried Sloane. “We’ll have him thrown out!” He rose to his feet and swayed back and forth, clinging to his chair	"Where?" Sloane yelled. "We'll get him kicked out!" He stood up and wobbled, holding onto his chair.

“Where is he?” Axia and Phoebe suddenly leaned and whispered to each other across the table, and before Amory realized it they found themselves on their way to the door. “Where now?” “Up to the flat,” suggested Phoebe. “We’ve got brandy and fizz—and everything’s slow down here tonight	"Where'd he go?" Axia and Phoebe leaned in, whispering to each other across the table. Before Amory knew it, they were heading for the door. "Where are we going?" "Up to the apartment," Phoebe said. "We have brandy and champagne, and it's boring here tonight."

Amory considered quickly. He hadn’t been drinking, and decided that if he took no more, it would be reasonably discreet for him to trot along in the party	Amory thought fast. He was sober and figured if he stopped drinking now, he could hang out with the group without causing too much of a scene.

In fact, it would be, perhaps, the thing to do in order to keep an eye on Sloane, who was not in a state to do his own thinking. So he took Axia’s arm and, piling intimately into a taxicab, they drove out over the hundreds and drew up at a tall, white-stone apartment-house. Never would he forget that street. It was a broad street, lined on both sides with just such tall, white-stone buildings, dotted with dark windows; they stretched along as far as the eye could see, flooded with a bright moonlight that gave them a calcium pallor	Actually, it might be a good idea to keep an eye on Sloane, since he couldn't think clearly for himself. So, he took Axia's arm, and they squeezed close together in a taxi and drove for miles until they arrived at a tall, white apartment building. He'd never forget that street. It was wide, with tall, white buildings like that one on both sides, with dark windows. They went on forever, lit by a bright moonlight that made them look pale and ghostly.

He imagined each one to have an elevator and a colored hall-boy and a key-rack; each one to be eight stories high and full of three and four room suites. He was rather glad to walk into the cheeriness of Phoebe’s living-room and sink onto a sofa, while the girls went rummaging for food	He pictured each house having an elevator, a uniformed hall attendant, and a key holder. He saw them as eight stories tall, filled with apartments of three or four rooms. He felt happy to enter Phoebe's cheerful living room and relax on the couch while the girls looked for something to eat.

“Phoebe’s great stuff,” confided Sloane, sotto voce. “I’m only going to stay half an hour,” Amory said sternly. He wondered if it sounded priggish. “Hell y’ say,” protested Sloane	"Phoebe's really cool," Sloane whispered. "I'm only staying for half an hour," Amory said firmly. He wondered if he sounded like a goody-two-shoes. "No way," Sloane replied.

“We’re here now—don’t le’s rush.” “I don’t like this place,” Amory said sulkily, “and I don’t want any food	"We're here, so let's not hurry." "I don't like it here," Amory said, sounding annoyed, "and I don't want to eat."

Phoebe reappeared with sandwiches, brandy bottle, siphon, and four glasses. “Amory, pour ’em out,” she said, “and we’ll drink to Fred Sloane, who has a rare, distinguished edge.” “Yes,” said Axia, coming in, “and Amory	Phoebe came back with sandwiches, a bottle of brandy, a soda siphon, and four glasses. "Amory, pour the drinks," she told him, "and we'll toast Fred Sloane, who's really special and cool." "Totally," said Axia, walking in, "and Amory..."

I like Amory.” She sat down beside him and laid her yellow head on his shoulder. “I’ll pour,” said Sloane; “you use siphon, Phoebe	"I like Amory." She sat next to him and rested her blonde head on his shoulder. "I'll do the pouring," said Sloane. "You use the soda water siphon, Phoebe."

They filled the tray with glasses. “Ready, here she goes!” Amory hesitated, glass in hand. There was a minute while temptation crept over him like a warm wind, and his imagination turned to fire, and he took the glass from Phoebe’s hand. That was all; for at the second that his decision came, he looked up and saw, ten yards from him, the man who had been in the café, and with his jump of astonishment the glass fell from his uplifted hand	They loaded up the tray with drinks. "Okay, here we go!" Amory paused, holding a glass. For a moment, he felt really tempted, like a warm wave washing over him, and he started imagining things, getting really excited. He took the glass from Phoebe. That's it; because the moment he decided, he looked up and saw the guy from the café standing nearby. He was so surprised he dropped the glass.

There the man half sat, half leaned against a pile of pillows on the corner divan. His face was cast in the same yellow wax as in the café, neither the dull, pasty color of a dead man—rather a sort of virile pallor—nor unhealthy, you’d have called it; but like a strong man who’d worked in a mine or done night shifts in a damp climate. Amory looked him over carefully and later he could have drawn him after a fashion, down to the merest details	The man was sitting kind of slumped against some pillows on the corner couch. His face had that same yellow tint it did in the cafe. It wasn't a pale, dead color, but more like a strong, healthy paleness. Not unhealthy, just like someone who'd worked in a mine or worked nights in a wet place. Amory checked him out closely. Later, he could have drawn a pretty good picture of him, right down to the smallest details.

His mouth was the kind that is called frank, and he had steady gray eyes that moved slowly from one to the other of their group, with just the shade of a questioning expression. Amory noticed his hands; they weren’t fine at all, but they had versatility and a tenuous strength. they were nervous hands that sat lightly along the cushions and moved constantly with little jerky openings and closings. Then, suddenly, Amory perceived the feet, and with a rush of blood to the head he realized he was afraid	He had an honest-looking mouth and calm, gray eyes that slowly looked at everyone, as if he was slightly questioning them. Amory saw his hands. They weren't elegant, but they looked like they could do many things and were surprisingly strong. They were restless hands that barely touched the cushions, and they kept twitching open and closed. Then, Amory noticed his feet, and suddenly he felt a rush of fear.

The feet were all wrong. with a sort of wrongness that he felt rather than knew	Something was off about the feet, in a way he sensed more than understood.

It was like weakness in a good woman, or blood on satin; one of those terrible incongruities that shake little things in the back of the brain. He wore no shoes, but, instead, a sort of half moccasin, pointed, though, like the shoes they wore in the fourteenth century, and with the little ends curling up. They were a darkish brown and his toes seemed to fill them to the end	It felt wrong, like a good woman being flawed, or blood staining something beautiful. It was a jarring mismatch that bothered him in the back of his mind. He wasn't wearing shoes, but these weird half-moccasins, pointy like shoes from the 1300s, with curled-up toes. They were a brownish color, and his toes looked cramped inside.

They were unutterably terrible. He must have said something, or looked something, for Axia’s voice came out of the void with a strange goodness. “Well, look at Amory! Poor old Amory’s sick—old head going ’round?” “Look at that man!” cried Amory, pointing toward the corner divan. “You mean that purple zebra!” shrieked Axia facetiously	They were incredibly awful. He must have spoken or shown something in his face, because Axia's voice, seemingly from nowhere, sounded surprisingly kind. “Hey, look at Amory! Poor Amory’s not feeling well—head spinning?” “Check out that guy!” Amory yelled, pointing to the couch in the corner. “You mean that ridiculous purple dresser!” Axia squealed jokingly.

“Ooo-ee! Amory’s got a purple zebra watching him!” Sloane laughed vacantly. “Ole zebra gotcha, Amory?” There was a silence. The man regarded Amory quizzically. Then the human voices fell faintly on his ear: “Thought you weren’t drinking,” remarked Axia sardonically, but her voice was good to hear; the whole divan that held the man was alive; alive like heat waves over asphalt, like wriggling worms	"Wow! Amory's seeing things!" Sloane laughed, spaced out. "The zebra got you, Amory?" It went quiet. The man looked at Amory, confused. Then Amory heard people talking softly: "I thought you weren't drinking," Axia said sarcastically, but it was nice to hear her voice. The whole couch where the man was felt alive, like heat rising off a road or squirming worms.

“Come back! Come back!” Axia’s arm fell on his. “Amory, dear, you aren’t going, Amory!” He was halfway to the door. “Come on, Amory, stick ’th us!” “Sick, are you?” “Sit down a second!” “Take some water.” “Take a little brandy	"Come back! Come back!" Axia grabbed his arm. "Amory, honey, you're not leaving, are you?" He was already almost at the door. "Come on, Amory, stay with us!" "You feeling sick?" "Just sit down for a minute!" "Have some water." "Have a little brandy."

The elevator was close, and the colored boy was half asleep, paled to a livid bronze. Axia’s beseeching voice floated down the shaft. Those feet. those feet	The elevator was nearby, and the Black elevator operator was half asleep, his skin looking like dull bronze. Axia's pleading voice echoed from upstairs. Those feet... those feet.

As they settled to the lower floor the feet came into view in the sickly electric light of the paved hall.	When they got to the ground floor, you could see people's feet in the dim electric light of the hallway.

Down the long street came the moon, and Amory turned his back on it and walked. Ten, fifteen steps away sounded the footsteps	The moon was shining down the street. Amory turned away from it and started walking. He could hear footsteps behind him, about ten or fifteen steps back.

They were like a slow dripping, with just the slightest insistence in their fall. Amory’s shadow lay, perhaps, ten feet ahead of him, and soft shoes was presumably that far behind. With the instinct of a child Amory edged in under the blue darkness of the white buildings, cleaving the moonlight for haggard seconds, once bursting into a slow run with clumsy stumblings. After that he stopped suddenly; he must keep hold, he thought	They felt like a slow, steady drip, barely noticeable but constant. Amory's shadow stretched about ten feet in front of him, and Soft Shoes was probably that far behind. Like a child, Amory instinctively moved into the dark shadows of the white buildings, cutting through the moonlight for a few tense moments, even breaking into a clumsy run once. Then he stopped abruptly, realizing he had to stay in control.

His lips were dry and he licked them. If he met anyone good—were there any good people left in the world or did they all live in white apartment-houses now? Was everyone followed in the moonlight? But if he met someone good who’d know what he meant and hear this damned scuffle. then the scuffling grew suddenly nearer, and a black cloud settled over the moon	His lips felt dry, and he licked them. If he found someone decent—were there even any decent people left, or did they all live in fancy apartments now? Was everyone being watched in the dark? But if he found someone decent who would understand him and hear this annoying noise... Then the noise got suddenly closer, and a dark cloud covered the moon.

When again the pale sheen skimmed the cornices, it was almost beside him, and Amory thought he heard a quiet breathing. Suddenly he realized that the footsteps were not behind, had never been behind, they were ahead and he was not eluding but following	As the faint light touched the edges of the buildings again, it felt very close, almost next to him. Amory thought he heard someone breathing softly. Then he suddenly understood that the footsteps weren't behind him, they never had been. They were in front, and he wasn't getting away, he was chasing after them.

following. He began to run, blindly, his heart knocking heavily, his hands clinched	He started running without seeing where he was going. His heart pounded, and his fists were clenched tight.

Far ahead a black dot showed itself, resolved slowly into a human shape. But Amory was beyond that now; he turned off the street and darted into an alley, narrow and dark and smelling of old rottenness	In the distance, he saw a small dark shape that gradually became a person. But Amory wasn't focused on that anymore. He quickly turned off the street and ran into a narrow, dark alley that smelled like something decaying.

He twisted down a long, sinuous blackness, where the moonlight was shut away except for tiny glints and patches. then suddenly sank panting into a corner by a fence, exhausted. The steps ahead stopped, and he could hear them shift slightly with a continuous motion, like waves around a dock. He put his face in his hands and covered eyes and ears as well as he could	He went down a long, dark path, where the moonlight barely peeked through in little spots. He collapsed, breathing hard, in a corner by a fence, totally worn out. The people in front of him stopped walking. He could hear them moving a little, like waves gently hitting a dock. He buried his face in his hands, trying to block out everything he could see and hear.

During all this time it never occurred to him that he was delirious or drunk. He had a sense of reality such as material things could never give him. His intellectual content seemed to submit passively to it, and it fitted like a glove everything that had ever preceded it in his life	The whole time, he didn't think he was crazy or wasted. He felt more real than anything physical could make him feel. His thoughts just went along with it, and it all made perfect sense with everything he'd ever experienced.

It did not muddle him. It was like a problem whose answer he knew on paper, yet whose solution he was unable to grasp. He was far beyond horror	It didn't confuse him. It was like knowing the answer to a problem but not understanding how to actually solve it. He felt something stronger than just being scared.

He had sunk through the thin surface of that, now moved in a region where the feet and the fear of white walls were real, living things, things he must accept. Only far inside his soul a little fire leaped and cried that something was pulling him down, trying to get him inside a door and slam it behind him. After that door was slammed there would be only footfalls and white buildings in the moonlight, and perhaps he would be one of the footfalls	He'd broken through his old, shallow life and was now in a place where everyday worries and the dread of conformity felt very real. He had to deal with them. Deep down, though, he felt like something was dragging him down, trying to trap him and shut him off. Once he was trapped, all that would be left was the mundane routine of life and the cold, impersonal world, and maybe he'd just become another part of that routine.

During the five or ten minutes he waited in the shadow of the fence, there was somehow this fire. that was as near as he could name it afterward. He remembered calling aloud: “I want someone stupid	While he waited by the fence for maybe five or ten minutes, he felt this intense, burning feeling. That's the best way he could describe it later. He remembered shouting, "I want someone dumb!"

Oh, send someone stupid!” This to the black fence opposite him, in whose shadows the footsteps shuffled.	"Just send someone dumb!" He said this to the dark fence across from him, where he could hear someone walking quietly.

He supposed “stupid” and “good” had become somehow intermingled through previous association. When he called thus it was not an act of will at all—will had turned him away from the moving figure in the street; it was almost instinct that called, just the pile on pile of inherent tradition or some wild prayer from way over the night	He figured that "stupid" and "good" had gotten mixed up in his head because he'd heard them used together before. When he said it, he wasn't even thinking about it. He wasn't choosing to do it - he’d stopped himself from following the girl down the street. It was almost like a gut reaction, just years of old habits or some desperate, late-night plea coming out.

Then something clanged like a low gong struck at a distance, and before his eyes a face flashed over the two feet, a face pale and distorted with a sort of infinite evil that twisted it like flame in the wind; but he knew, for the half instant that the gong tanged and hummed, that it was the face of Dick Humbird. Minutes later he sprang to his feet, realizing dimly that there was no more sound, and that he was alone in the graying alley. It was cold, and he started on a steady run for the light that showed the street at the other end.	Then, something rang out, like a distant, muffled gong. A face suddenly appeared very close, pale and twisted with pure evil, like a flame flickering in the wind. For a brief moment, as the gong echoed, he recognized Dick Humbird. A few minutes later, he jumped up, vaguely aware that the sound was gone and he was alone in the darkening alley. It was cold, so he started running towards the light coming from the street at the alley's end.

It was late morning when he woke and found the telephone beside his bed in the hotel tolling frantically, and remembered that he had left word to be called at eleven. Sloane was snoring heavily, his clothes in a pile by his bed. They dressed and ate breakfast in silence, and then sauntered out to get some air. Amory’s mind was working slowly, trying to assimilate what had happened and separate from the chaotic imagery that stacked his memory the bare shreds of truth	He woke up late morning to his hotel room phone ringing like crazy. He remembered asking to be woken up at eleven. Sloane was snoring loudly, his clothes in a heap next to his bed. They got dressed, ate breakfast without talking, and then went out for a walk to clear their heads. Amory was thinking slowly, trying to understand what had happened and pick out the real facts from the jumbled memories in his head.

If the morning had been cold and gray he could have grasped the reins of the past in an instant, but it was one of those days that New York gets sometimes in May, when the air on Fifth Avenue is a soft, light wine. How much or how little Sloane remembered Amory did not care to know; he apparently had none of the nervous tension that was gripping Amory and forcing his mind back and forth like a shrieking saw	If the morning had been gloomy and cold, he could have easily taken control of his memories. But it was one of those perfect May days in New York, where the air on Fifth Avenue feels amazing. He didn't care how much or how little Sloane remembered him. Sloane didn't seem to have the anxiety that was hitting Amory hard, making his mind race like a screaming machine.

Then Broadway broke upon them, and with the babel of noise and the painted faces a sudden sickness rushed over Amory. “For God’s sake, let’s go back! Let’s get off of this—this place!” Sloane looked at him in amazement. “What do you mean?” “This street, it’s ghastly! Come on! let’s get back to the Avenue!” “Do you mean to say,” said Sloane stolidly, “that ’cause you had some sort of indigestion that made you act like a maniac last night, you’re never coming on Broadway again?” Simultaneously Amory classed him with the crowd, and he seemed no longer Sloane of the debonair humor and the happy personality, but only one of the evil faces that whirled along the turbid stream. “Man!” he shouted so loud that the people on the corner turned and followed them with their eyes, “it’s filthy, and if you can’t see it, you’re filthy, too!” “I can’t help it,” said Sloane doggedly	Then they hit Broadway, and the noise and all the makeup on people's faces suddenly made Amory feel sick. "God, let's go back! Let's get out of this place!" Sloane stared at him, surprised. "What are you talking about?" "This street is awful! Come on, let's go back to the Avenue!" "Are you saying," Sloane asked, unimpressed, "that just because you had some kind of stomach problem that made you crazy last night, you're never coming to Broadway again?" Right then, Amory thought of him as just part of the crowd. He wasn't the cool, fun Sloane anymore, but just another one of the gross faces in the crazy rush of people. "Man!" he yelled so loud people on the corner turned to look at them. "It's disgusting, and if you can't see that, you're disgusting too!" "I can't help it," Sloane said stubbornly.

“What’s the matter with you? Old remorse getting you? You’d be in a fine state if you’d gone through with our little party.” “I’m going, Fred,” said Amory slowly	"What's wrong? Feeling guilty about something you did? You'd be a mess if you'd actually gone through with our plan." "I'm leaving, Fred," Amory said slowly.

His knees were shaking under him, and he knew that if he stayed another minute on this street he would keel over where he stood. “I’ll be at the Vanderbilt for lunch	He was so nervous his knees were shaking, and he knew he'd pass out if he stayed on the street any longer. "I'll be at the Vanderbilt hotel for lunch."

And he strode rapidly off and turned over to Fifth Avenue. Back at the hotel he felt better, but as he walked into the barbershop, intending to get a head massage, the smell of the powders and tonics brought back Axia’s sidelong, suggestive smile, and he left hurriedly. In the doorway of his room a sudden blackness flowed around him like a divided river	He walked quickly away and onto Fifth Avenue. He felt better when he got back to the hotel. But when he went into the barbershop to get a head massage, the smell of the powders and lotions reminded him of Axia's flirty smile, so he quickly left. Standing in his doorway, a sudden wave of darkness overwhelmed him.

When he came to himself he knew that several hours had passed. He pitched onto the bed and rolled over on his face with a deadly fear that he was going mad. He wanted people, people, someone sane and stupid and good	When he woke up, he realized hours had gone by. He collapsed on the bed, face down, terrified he was losing his mind. He needed people around him – someone normal, not too bright, and decent.

He lay for he knew not how long without moving. He could feel the little hot veins on his forehead standing out, and his terror had hardened on him like plaster	He lay still for a long time, not knowing how long. He could feel the small, hot veins throbbing on his forehead, and his fear had become a solid weight on him.

He felt he was passing up again through the thin crust of horror, and now only could he distinguish the shadowy twilight he was leaving. He must have fallen asleep again, for when he next recollected himself he had paid the hotel bill and was stepping into a taxi at the door. It was raining torrents	He felt like he was breaking through the awful feeling again, and could barely see the darkness he was leaving behind. He must have fallen back asleep because the next thing he remembered, he'd paid the hotel bill and was getting into a taxi outside. It was pouring rain.

On the train for Princeton he saw no one he knew, only a crowd of fagged-looking Philadelphians. The presence of a painted woman across the aisle filled him with a fresh burst of sickness and he changed to another car, tried to concentrate on an article in a popular magazine. He found himself reading the same paragraphs over and over, so he abandoned this attempt and leaning over wearily pressed his hot forehead against the damp windowpane. The car, a smoker, was hot and stuffy with most of the smells of the state’s alien population; he opened a window and shivered against the cloud of fog that drifted in over him	On the train to Princeton, he didn't recognize anyone, just a bunch of tired-looking people from Philadelphia. He felt sick again when he saw a woman with heavy makeup across the aisle. He moved to another car and tried to focus on an article in a magazine. But he kept rereading the same lines. He gave up and, feeling exhausted, leaned his hot forehead against the cool, wet window. The smoking car was hot and stuffy, filled with the smells of immigrants. He opened a window and shivered as the fog rolled in.

The two hours’ ride were like days, and he nearly cried aloud with joy when the towers of Princeton loomed up beside him and the yellow squares of light filtered through the blue rain. Tom was standing in the centre of the room, pensively relighting a cigar-stub. Amory fancied he looked rather relieved on seeing him. “Had a hell of a dream about you last night,” came in the cracked voice through the cigar smoke	The two-hour train ride felt like forever, and he almost yelled with happiness when he saw Princeton's buildings and the yellow lights shining through the rainy darkness. Tom was in the middle of the room, thoughtfully relighting an old cigar. Amory thought Tom seemed relieved to see him. "I had a really bad dream about you last night," Tom said in his raspy voice through the smoke.

“I had an idea you were in some trouble.” “Don’t tell me about it!” Amory almost shrieked. “Don’t say a word; I’m tired and pepped out.” Tom looked at him queerly and then sank into a chair and opened his Italian notebook	"I thought you were having some problems." "Just shut up about it!" Amory nearly yelled. "Don't say anything; I'm exhausted and drained." Tom gave him a strange look, then plopped into a chair and opened his Italian notebook.

Amory threw his coat and hat on the floor, loosened his collar, and took a Wells novel at random from the shelf. “Wells is sane,” he thought, “and if he won’t do I’ll read Rupert Brooke	Amory tossed his coat and hat on the floor, unbuttoned his collar, and grabbed a random H.G. Wells book. "Wells is normal," he thought, "and if he doesn't work, I'll read Rupert Brooke."

Half an hour passed. Outside the wind came up, and Amory started as the wet branches moved and clawed with their fingernails at the windowpane	Thirty minutes went by. Outside, the wind picked up, and Amory jumped when the wet branches scraped and scratched at the window like fingernails.

Tom was deep in his work, and inside the room only the occasional scratch of a match or the rustle of leather as they shifted in their chairs broke the stillness. Then like a zigzag of lightning came the change. Amory sat bolt upright, frozen cold in his chair. Tom was looking at him with his mouth drooping, eyes fixed	Tom was really focused on his work. The room was quiet, only broken by the sound of a match being struck or the slight noise of them moving in their leather chairs. Then, everything suddenly changed. Amory sat up straight, feeling frozen in his chair. Tom was staring at him with his mouth hanging open and a blank look in his eyes.

“God help us!” Amory cried. “Oh, my heavens!” shouted Tom, “look behind!” Quick as a flash Amory whirled around. He saw nothing but the dark windowpane. “It’s gone now,” came Tom’s voice after a second in a still terror	"Oh man!" Amory yelled. "Holy crap!" Tom shouted, "look behind you!" Amory spun around fast. He didn't see anything except the dark window. "It's gone now," Tom said a second later, his voice still scared.

“Something was looking at you.” Trembling violently, Amory dropped into his chair again. “I’ve got to tell you,” he said	"I felt like something was watching me." Shaking badly, Amory sat back down. "I need to tell you something," he said.

“I’ve had one hell of an experience. I think I’ve—I’ve seen the devil or—something like him. What face did you just see?—or no,” he added quickly, “don’t tell me!” And he gave Tom the story. It was midnight when he finished, and after that, with all lights burning, two sleepy, shivering boys read to each other from The New Machiavelli, until dawn came up out of Witherspoon Hall, and the Princetonian fell against the door, and the May birds hailed the sun on last night’s rain	"I went through something crazy. I think I saw the devil, or something like him. What did you just see? Never mind, don't tell me!" Then he told Tom everything that happened. It was midnight when he finished the story. After that, with all the lights on, two tired, shaky boys read aloud to each other from "The New Machiavelli" until the sun rose over Witherspoon Hall. Then, the Princeton student leaned against the door, and the birds sang to the sun after last night's rain.

During Princeton’s transition period, that is, during Amory’s last two years there, while he saw it change and broaden and live up to its Gothic beauty by better means than night parades, certain individuals arrived who stirred it to its plethoric depths. Some of them had been freshmen, and wild freshmen, with Amory; some were in the class below; and it was in the beginning of his last year and around small tables at the Nassau Inn that they began questioning aloud the institutions that Amory and countless others before him had questioned so long in secret. First, and partly by accident, they struck on certain books, a definite type of biographical novel that Amory christened “quest” books. In the “quest” book the hero set off in life armed with the best weapons and avowedly intending to use them as such weapons are usually used, to push their possessors ahead as selfishly and blindly as possible, but the heroes of the “quest” books discovered that there might be a more magnificent use for them	In Amory's last two years at Princeton, when things were changing for the better and the school was really living up to its beautiful buildings, some new people showed up and shook things up. Some were guys Amory knew from freshman year, and some were younger. In his last year, they started hanging out at the Nassau Inn and openly questioning the same stuff that Amory and others had always secretly wondered about. It started when they stumbled upon certain books, a type of novel Amory called "quest" books. In these books, the main character starts out with everything they need to succeed and plans to use it to get ahead, like most people do. But then, the characters realize there might be a better way to use their advantages.

None Other Gods, Sinister Street, and The Research Magnificent were examples of such books; it was the latter of these three that gripped Burne Holiday and made him wonder in the beginning of senior year how much it was worth while being a diplomatic autocrat around his club on Prospect Avenue and basking in the high lights of class office. It was distinctly through the channels of aristocracy that Burne found his way. Amory, through Kerry, had had a vague drifting acquaintance with him, but not until January of senior year did their friendship commence. “Heard the latest?” said Tom, coming in late one drizzly evening with that triumphant air he always wore after a successful conversational bout	Books like *None Other Gods*, *Sinister Street*, and *The Research Magnificent* were that kind of book. *The Research Magnificent* especially got to Burne Holiday. At the start of senior year, it made him question if it was really worth being a big shot in his club on Prospect Avenue and enjoying the perks of being a class officer. Burne was definitely someone who climbed the social ladder. Amory knew him a little through Kerry, but they didn't become friends until January of senior year. "Did you hear the latest?" Tom asked, walking in late one rainy evening, looking pleased with himself after a good conversation.

“No. Somebody flunked out? Or another ship sunk?” “Worse than that. About one-third of the junior class are going to resign from their clubs	"No. Did someone fail? Or did another boat sink?" "It's worse. About a third of the junior class is quitting their clubs."

“What!” “Actual fact!” “Why!” “Spirit of reform and all that. Burne Holiday is behind it	"Seriously!" "For real!" "Wow!" "It's about changing things for the better. Burne Holiday is the one pushing it."

The club presidents are holding a meeting tonight to see if they can find a joint means of combating it.” “Well, what’s the idea of the thing?” “Oh, clubs injurious to Princeton democracy; cost a lot; draw social lines, take time; the regular line you get sometimes from disappointed sophomores. Woodrow thought they should be abolished and all that.” “But this is the real thing?” “Absolutely	The club leaders are meeting tonight to figure out how to fight it together." "Okay, what's the problem with these clubs?" "They're bad for Princeton's democracy, expensive, create social divisions, and take up too much time. It's the usual complaints you hear, often from sophomores who didn't get in. Woodrow Wilson even wanted to get rid of them." "But is this a serious issue?" "Totally."

I think it’ll go through.” “For Pete’s sake, tell me more about it.” “Well,” began Tom, “it seems that the idea developed simultaneously in several heads. I was talking to Burne awhile ago, and he claims that it’s a logical result if an intelligent person thinks long enough about the social system	"I think it'll happen." "Come on, tell me what it is!" "Okay," Tom started, "apparently, a few people came up with the same idea at the same time. I was just talking to Burne, and he thinks it's just what you'd expect if smart people spent enough time thinking about society."

They had a ‘discussion crowd’ and the point of abolishing the clubs was brought up by someone—everybody there leaped at it—it had been in each one’s mind, more or less, and it just needed a spark to bring it out.” “Fine! I swear I think it’ll be most entertaining	They hung out with a group that liked to debate things, and someone suggested getting rid of the clubs. Everyone jumped on the idea. They'd all been thinking about it, one way or another, and it just took someone to say it out loud. "Great! I bet that'll be really fun to watch."

How do they feel up at Cap and Gown?” “Wild, of course. Everyone’s been sitting and arguing and swearing and getting mad and getting sentimental and getting brutal. It’s the same at all the clubs; I’ve been the rounds. They get one of the radicals in the corner and fire questions at him	"How are things at Cap and Gown?" "Crazy, obviously. Everyone's been sitting around arguing, cursing, getting angry, getting emotional, and being harsh. It's the same at all the clubs; I've been checking them out. They corner one of the more radical guys and start grilling him with questions."

“How do the radicals stand up?” “Oh, moderately well. Burne’s a damn good talker, and so obviously sincere that you can’t get anywhere with him	"How are the radicals doing?" "Okay, I guess. Burne's a really good speaker, and he's so clearly genuine that you can't argue with him."

It’s so evident that resigning from his club means so much more to him than preventing it does to us that I felt futile when I argued; finally took a position that was brilliantly neutral. In fact, I believe Burne thought for a while that he’d converted me.” “And you say almost a third of the junior class are going to resign?” “Call it a fourth and be safe.” “Lord—who’d have thought it possible!” There was a brisk knock at the door, and Burne himself came in	It's clear that quitting his club is way more important to him than stopping the resignations is to us. Arguing felt pointless, so I ended up taking a totally neutral stance. I even think Burne thought he'd changed my mind for a bit. "And you're saying almost a third of the junior class will resign?" "Let's say a fourth, just to be sure." "Wow—who would have guessed!" There was a knock at the door, and Burne walked in.

“Hello, Amory—hello, Tom.” Amory rose. “Evening, Burne	"Hey Amory, hey Tom." Amory stood up. "Evening, Burne."

Don’t mind if I seem to rush; I’m going to Renwick’s.” Burne turned to him quickly. “You probably know what I want to talk to Tom about, and it isn’t a bit private. I wish you’d stay	Sorry if I seem like I'm hurrying, but I'm heading to Renwick's." Burne quickly faced him. "You probably know what I want to talk to Tom about, and it's not a secret at all. I wish you'd stick around.

“I’d be glad to.” Amory sat down again, and as Burne perched on a table and launched into argument with Tom, he looked at this revolutionary more carefully than he ever had before	"Sure thing." Amory sat back down. Burne jumped up on a table and started arguing with Tom, and Amory looked at this rebel more closely than he ever had.

Broad-browed and strong-chinned, with a fineness in the honest gray eyes that were like Kerry’s, Burne was a man who gave an immediate impression of bigness and security—stubborn, that was evident, but his stubbornness wore no stolidity, and when he had talked for five minutes Amory knew that this keen enthusiasm had in it no quality of dilettantism. The intense power Amory felt later in Burne Holiday differed from the admiration he had had for Humbird. This time it began as purely a mental interest	Burne, with his wide forehead and strong jaw, had honest, sharp gray eyes like Kerry's. Right away, you got the sense he was a big, reliable guy. He was clearly stubborn, but not in a dull way. After talking to him for just five minutes, Amory realized his strong passion wasn't just a shallow hobby. The powerful impact Burne Holiday had on Amory later was different from how he felt about Humbird. This time, it started purely as intellectual curiosity.

With other men of whom he had thought as primarily first-class, he had been attracted first by their personalities, and in Burne he missed that immediate magnetism to which he usually swore allegiance. But that night Amory was struck by Burne’s intense earnestness, a quality he was accustomed to associate only with the dread stupidity, and by the great enthusiasm that struck dead chords in his heart	Usually, when he met guys he considered top-notch, he liked them right away because of their personalities. Burne didn't have that instant appeal Amory was used to. But that night, Amory noticed how incredibly serious Burne was. Amory usually thought that kind of seriousness meant someone was boring and dumb. He was also moved by Burne's strong passion, which sparked feelings Amory thought he'd lost.

Burne stood vaguely for a land Amory hoped he was drifting toward—and it was almost time that land was in sight. Tom and Amory and Alec had reached an impasse; never did they seem to have new experiences in common, for Tom and Alec had been as blindly busy with their committees and boards as Amory had been blindly idling, and the things they had for dissection—college, contemporary personality and the like—they had hashed and rehashed for many a frugal conversational meal	Burne represented a future Amory hoped to have. It was almost time to see that future clearly. Amory, Tom, and Alec were stuck; they didn't share new things anymore. Tom and Alec were super involved in their campus groups, while Amory had been totally wasting time. They'd talked about the same old stuff—college, people—over and over, using it to fill boring conversations.

That night they discussed the clubs until twelve, and, in the main, they agreed with Burne. To the roommates it did not seem such a vital subject as it had in the two years before, but the logic of Burne’s objections to the social system dovetailed so completely with everything they had thought, that they questioned rather than argued, and envied the sanity that enabled this man to stand out so against all traditions. Then Amory branched off and found that Burne was deep in other things as well	That night they talked about the clubs until midnight, and mostly agreed with Burne. It didn't seem as important to them as it used to, but Burne's reasons for disliking the social system made perfect sense to them. They mostly asked questions instead of disagreeing, and admired his ability to reject tradition. Then Amory changed the subject and realized Burne was interested in other things too.

Economics had interested him and he was turning socialist. Pacifism played in the back of his mind, and he read the Masses and Lyoff Tolstoy faithfully. “How about religion?” Amory asked him. “Don’t know	He'd gotten into economics and was becoming a socialist. The idea of peace was always there, and he regularly read "The Masses" and Leo Tolstoy. "What about religion?" Amory asked. "No idea."

I’m in a muddle about a lot of things—I’ve just discovered that I’ve a mind, and I’m starting to read.” “Read what?” “Everything	I'm confused about a lot. I just realized I can think for myself, and I'm starting to read." "Read what?" "Everything."

I have to pick and choose, of course, but mostly things to make me think. I’m reading the four gospels now, and the Varieties of Religious Experience.” “What chiefly started you?” “Wells, I guess, and Tolstoy, and a man named Edward Carpenter. I’ve been reading for over a year now—on a few lines, on what I consider the essential lines	I have to be selective, obviously, but mostly I read stuff that makes me think. Right now, I'm reading the four gospels and "The Varieties of Religious Experience." "What got you started?" "Probably Wells, Tolstoy, and this guy Edward Carpenter. I’ve been reading for more than a year – focusing on the main ideas, the things I think are most important.”

“Poetry?” “Well, frankly, not what you call poetry, or for your reasons—you two write, of course, and look at things differently. Whitman is the man that attracts me.” “Whitman?” “Yes; he’s a definite ethical force	"Poetry?" "To be honest, not exactly what you'd call poetry, and not for the same reasons you'd like it. You two write, so you see things differently. Whitman's the guy I'm into." "Whitman?" "Yeah, he definitely has a strong moral message."

“Well, I’m ashamed to say that I’m a blank on the subject of Whitman. How about you, Tom?” Tom nodded sheepishly. “Well,” continued Burne, “you may strike a few poems that are tiresome, but I mean the mass of his work	"Okay, I gotta admit, I don't know anything about Whitman. What about you, Tom?" Tom nodded, looking embarrassed. "Well," Burne went on, "some of his poems might be boring, but I'm talking about his work as a whole."

He’s tremendous—like Tolstoy. They both look things in the face, and, somehow, different as they are, stand for somewhat the same things.” “You have me stumped, Burne,” Amory admitted	"He's amazing, like Tolstoy. They both face reality head-on and, even though they're different, they represent similar ideas." "I don't understand what you mean, Burne," Amory said.

“I’ve read Anna Karénina and the Kreutzer Sonata of course, but Tolstoy is mostly in the original Russian as far as I’m concerned.” “He’s the greatest man in hundreds of years,” cried Burne enthusiastically	"Yeah, I've read Anna Karenina and the Kreutzer Sonata, but Tolstoy might as well be writing in Russian for all I understand." "He's the best person in centuries!" Burne exclaimed, really excited.

“Did you ever see a picture of that shaggy old head of his?” They talked until three, from biology to organized religion, and when Amory crept shivering into bed it was with his mind aglow with ideas and a sense of shock that someone else had discovered the path he might have followed. Burne Holiday was so evidently developing—and Amory had considered that he was doing the same	"Did you ever see a photo of his messy, old-man hair?" They talked until 3 AM, about everything from science to religion. When Amory finally went to bed, cold and shaking, his head was buzzing with new thoughts. He was surprised someone else had figured out the direction his life could have taken. Burne Holiday was clearly growing and changing – and Amory thought he was doing the same thing too.

He had fallen into a deep cynicism over what had crossed his path, plotted the imperfectability of man and read Shaw and Chesterton enough to keep his mind from the edges of decadence—now suddenly all his mental processes of the last year and a half seemed stale and futile—a petty consummation of himself. and like a sombre background lay that incident of the spring before, that filled half his nights with a dreary terror and made him unable to pray. He was not even a Catholic, yet that was the only ghost of a code that he had, the gaudy, ritualistic, paradoxical Catholicism whose prophet was Chesterton, whose claqueurs were such reformed rakes of literature as Huysmans and Bourget, whose American sponsor was Ralph Adams Cram, with his adulation of thirteenth-century cathedrals—a Catholicism which Amory found convenient and ready-made, without priest or sacraments or sacrifice	He'd become really cynical because of the stuff he'd been through. He figured people could never be perfect and read Shaw and Chesterton to keep himself from going completely off the rails. Now, all that thinking from the past year and a half felt pointless and worn out, like a waste of his time. And looming in the background was that thing that happened last spring. It filled his nights with fear and stopped him from praying. He wasn't even Catholic, but it was the only set of rules he kind of followed. It was that flashy, traditional, and complicated kind of Catholicism that Chesterton talked about, that writers like Huysmans and Bourget, who used to be wild, loved, and that some Americans like Ralph Adams Cram, who was obsessed with old cathedrals, promoted. Amory liked it because it was easy to use, no priests, no rituals, and no sacrifice needed.

He could not sleep, so he turned on his reading-lamp and, taking down the Kreutzer Sonata, searched it carefully for the germs of Burne’s enthusiasm. Being Burne was suddenly so much realler than being clever. Yet he sighed. here were other possible clay feet	He couldn't sleep, so he turned on his lamp and grabbed "The Kreutzer Sonata" to figure out what Burne was so excited about. Being like Burne seemed more appealing than just being smart. But he sighed, realizing Burne probably had his own flaws too.

He thought back through two years, of Burne as a hurried, nervous freshman, quite submerged in his brother’s personality. Then he remembered an incident of sophomore year, in which Burne had been suspected of the leading role. Dean Hollister had been heard by a large group arguing with a taxi-driver, who had driven him from the junction	He remembered Burne from two years ago: a shy, anxious freshman overshadowed by his brother. Then he recalled something from sophomore year where Burne was thought to be the main culprit. A lot of people overheard Dean Hollister arguing with a taxi driver who had driven him from the train station.

In the course of the altercation the dean remarked that he “might as well buy the taxicab.” He paid and walked off, but next morning he entered his private office to find the taxicab itself in the space usually occupied by his desk, bearing a sign which read “Property of Dean Hollister	During the argument, the dean said he "might as well just buy the taxi." He paid the fare and left. But the next morning, he walked into his office and found the actual taxi in the spot where his desk should have been. It had a sign that said, "Property of Dean Hollister."

Bought and Paid for.”. It took two expert mechanics half a day to dissemble it into its minutest parts and remove it, which only goes to prove the rare energy of sophomore humor under efficient leadership. Then again, that very fall, Burne had caused a sensation	"Bought and paid for." It took two skilled mechanics half a day to take it completely apart and get rid of it, which just shows how wild and crazy college humor can be when organized well. Also, that same semester, Burne did something that caused a stir.

A certain Phyllis Styles, an intercollegiate prom-trotter, had failed to get her yearly invitation to the Harvard–Princeton game. Jesse Ferrenby had brought her to a smaller game a few weeks before, and had pressed Burne into service—to the ruination of the latter’s misogyny	Phyllis Styles, who went to all the big college parties, didn't get invited to the Harvard-Princeton game that year. Jesse Ferrenby had taken her to a smaller game recently, and had forced Burne to hang out with them, which completely destroyed Burne's dislike of women.

“Are you coming to the Harvard game?” Burne had asked indiscreetly, merely to make conversation. “If you ask me,” cried Phyllis quickly. “Of course I do,” said Burne feebly	"You going to the Harvard game?" Burne asked, just trying to talk. "Are you asking my opinion?" Phyllis jumped in. "Yeah, I guess so," Burne mumbled.

He was unversed in the arts of Phyllis, and was sure that this was merely a vapid form of kidding. Before an hour had passed he knew that he was indeed involved. Phyllis had pinned him down and served him up, informed him the train she was arriving by, and depressed him thoroughly	He wasn't good at dealing with girls like Phyllis and thought she was just joking around. But he quickly realized she was serious. Phyllis had trapped him, told him when she was coming, and made him feel awful.

Aside from loathing Phyllis, he had particularly wanted to stag that game and entertain some Harvard friends. “She’ll see,” he informed a delegation who arrived in his room to josh him. “This will be the last game she ever persuades any young innocent to take her to!” “But, Burne—why did you invite her if you didn’t want her?” “Burne, you know you’re secretly mad about her—that’s the real trouble	Besides hating Phyllis, he really wanted to go to that game alone and hang out with some friends from Harvard. "She'll regret it," he told a group of guys who came to his room to tease him. "This is the last time she'll ever convince some poor sucker to take her anywhere!" "But Burne—why did you even ask her if you didn't want her there?" "Burne, you know you actually like her—that's the problem!"

“What can you do, Burne? What can you do against Phyllis?” But Burne only shook his head and muttered threats which consisted largely of the phrase: “She’ll see, she’ll see!” The blithesome Phyllis bore her twenty-five summers gayly from the train, but on the platform a ghastly sight met her eyes. There were Burne and Fred Sloane arrayed to the last dot like the lurid figures on college posters	"What can you do, Burne? What can you do against Phyllis?" But Burne just shook his head and mumbled threats, mostly just saying, "She'll see, she'll see!" Phyllis, happy and carefree, stepped off the train, acting like she didn't have a care in the world, but then she saw something shocking. Burne and Fred Sloane were standing on the platform, dressed to the nines and looking like those wild guys you see on college posters.

They had bought flaring suits with huge peg-top trousers and gigantic padded shoulders. On their heads were rakish college hats, pinned up in front and sporting bright orange-and-black bands, while from their celluloid collars blossomed flaming orange ties. They wore black armbands with orange “P’s,” and carried canes flying Princeton pennants, the effect completed by socks and peeping handkerchiefs in the same color motifs	They bought really flashy outfits with wide-legged pants and big, padded shoulders. They wore tilted college hats with orange and black stripes, and bright orange ties stuck out from their shiny collars. They had black armbands with orange "P's" on them and carried canes with Princeton flags. Their socks and handkerchiefs matched the orange and black theme.

On a clanking chain they led a large, angry tomcat, painted to represent a tiger. A good half of the station crowd was already staring at them, torn between horrified pity and riotous mirth, and as Phyllis, with her svelte jaw dropping, approached, the pair bent over and emitted a college cheer in loud, far-carrying voices, thoughtfully adding the name “Phyllis” to the end. She was vociferously greeted and escorted enthusiastically across the campus, followed by half a hundred village urchins—to the stifled laughter of hundreds of alumni and visitors, half of whom had no idea that this was a practical joke, but thought that Burne and Fred were two varsity sports showing their girl a collegiate time. Phyllis’s feelings as she was paraded by the Harvard and Princeton stands, where sat dozens of her former devotees, can be imagined	Dragging a big, mad cat painted like a tiger on a noisy chain, they walked by. Almost everyone at the station stared, unsure whether to feel sorry or laugh. When Phyllis came closer, looking shocked, the two guys bent down and yelled a college cheer, adding "Phyllis!" at the end. People cheered loudly and enthusiastically escorted her across campus, followed by a bunch of local kids. Alumni and visitors tried not to laugh. Many didn't even realize it was a joke and just thought Burne and Fred were athletes showing their girlfriend a good time. You can imagine how Phyllis felt being paraded past the Harvard and Princeton sections, full of her old admirers.

She tried to walk a little ahead, she tried to walk a little behind—but they stayed close, that there should be no doubt whom she was with, talking in loud voices of their friends on the football team, until she could almost hear her acquaintances whispering: “Phyllis Styles must be awfully hard up to have to come with those two.” That had been Burne, dynamically humorous, fundamentally serious	She tried walking slightly in front and slightly behind them, but they stuck close to her, making sure everyone knew she was with them. They talked loudly about their friends on the football team, and she could practically hear people she knew whispering, "Phyllis Styles must be really desperate to hang out with those two." That was Burne – funny and energetic, but also deep down serious.

From that root had blossomed the energy that he was now trying to orient with progress. So the weeks passed and March came and the clay feet that Amory looked for failed to appear	His drive and ambition, which came from that starting point, was what he was now trying to focus on making real progress. The weeks went by, March arrived, and Amory didn't see the flaws he expected in others.

About a hundred juniors and seniors resigned from their clubs in a final fury of righteousness, and the clubs in helplessness turned upon Burne their finest weapon: ridicule. Everyone who knew him liked him—but what he stood for (and he began to stand for more all the time) came under the lash of many tongues, until a frailer man than he would have been snowed under. “Don’t you mind losing prestige?” asked Amory one night	Around a hundred older students angrily quit their clubs, feeling morally superior. The clubs, unable to fight back effectively, mocked Burne, their best member. Everyone personally liked him, but what he represented (which was becoming more and more significant) was heavily criticized. A weaker person would have been overwhelmed. "Doesn't it bother you to lose respect?" Amory asked one night.

They had taken to exchanging calls several times a week. “Of course I don’t. What’s prestige, at best?” “Some people say that you’re just a rather original politician.” He roared with laughter	They started calling each other a few times a week. "Of course not. What's prestige even worth?" "Some people think you're just a really unique kind of politician." He burst out laughing.

“That’s what Fred Sloane told me today. I suppose I have it coming.” One afternoon they dipped into a subject that had interested Amory for a long time—the matter of the bearing of physical attributes on a man’s makeup	"That's what Fred Sloane told me today. I guess I deserve it." One afternoon they started talking about something Amory had been curious about for a while: how a person's looks affect their personality.

Burne had gone into the biology of this, and then: “Of course health counts—a healthy man has twice the chance of being good,” he said. “I don’t agree with you—I don’t believe in ‘muscular Christianity.’ ” “I do—I believe Christ had great physical vigor	Burne had looked into the science behind it, and then said, "Of course being healthy matters. A healthy guy is way more likely to be a good person." "I don't agree with you. I don't think being physically strong makes you a better Christian." "I do. I think Christ was really physically strong."

“Oh, no,” Amory protested. “He worked too hard for that	"No way," Amory argued. "He worked too hard for that."

I imagine that when he died he was a broken-down man—and the great saints haven’t been strong.” “Half of them have.” “Well, even granting that, I don’t think health has anything to do with goodness; of course, it’s valuable to a great saint to be able to stand enormous strains, but this fad of popular preachers rising on their toes in simulated virility, bellowing that calisthenics will save the world—no, Burne, I can’t go that.” “Well, let’s waive it—we won’t get anywhere, and besides I haven’t quite made up my mind about it myself	"I bet he was worn out when he died. The really good people aren't always strong." "Actually, half of them are." "Okay, even if that's true, I don't think being healthy makes you good. Sure, it helps a really good person handle a lot of pressure. But these popular preachers who act all energetic and shout about how exercise will fix everything? No way, Burne, I can't buy that." "Alright, forget it. We're not getting anywhere, and I'm still figuring it out myself anyway."

Now, here’s something I do know—personal appearance has a lot to do with it.” “Coloring?” Amory asked eagerly	Okay, I know this for sure: how you look is a big deal.” “Like, your complexion?” Amory asked, excited.

“Yes.” “That’s what Tom and I figured,” Amory agreed. “We took the yearbooks for the last ten years and looked at the pictures of the senior council. I know you don’t think much of that august body, but it does represent success here in a general way	"Yeah," Amory said. "Tom and I thought so too. We checked the last ten yearbooks and looked at the senior council photos. I know you don't respect them much, but they do kind of show what success looks like around here."

Well, I suppose only about thirty-five percent of every class here are blonds, are really light—yet two-thirds of every senior council are light. We looked at pictures of ten years of them, mind you; that means that out of every fifteen light-haired men in the senior class one is on the senior council, and of the dark-haired men it’s only one in fifty.” “It’s true,” Burne agreed. “The light-haired man is a higher type, generally speaking	"Okay, so probably only about a third of each class is blonde or really fair. But, like, two-thirds of the student government are blonde. We checked pictures from the last ten years, and basically, one out of every fifteen blond guys in the senior class is on the student council. For dark-haired guys, it's only one out of fifty." "Yeah, that's right," Burne said. "Blonde guys are usually better, you know?"

I worked the thing out with the Presidents of the United States once, and found that way over half of them were light-haired—yet think of the preponderant number of brunettes in the race.” “People unconsciously admit it,” said Amory. “You’ll notice a blond person is expected to talk	I figured it out by looking at the U.S. Presidents: more than half had light hair. But most people in general have dark hair. It's weird. "People know it without realizing it," Amory replied. "You expect a blonde to talk..."

If a blond girl doesn’t talk we call her a ‘doll’; if a light-haired man is silent he’s considered stupid. Yet the world is full of ‘dark silent men’ and ‘languorous brunettes’ who haven’t a brain in their heads, but somehow are never accused of the dearth.” “And the large mouth and broad chin and rather big nose undoubtedly make the superior face.” “I’m not so sure	If a blonde girl is quiet, people think she's just pretty; but if a blonde man is quiet, people think he's dumb. But there are plenty of quiet, dark-haired men and lazy, dark-haired women who aren't very smart, but nobody ever says they're lacking. "And a big mouth, strong chin, and kind of big nose definitely make for a smarter-looking face." "I'm not so sure."

Amory was all for classical features. “Oh, yes—I’ll show you,” and Burne pulled out of his desk a photographic collection of heavily bearded, shaggy celebrities—Tolstoy, Whitman, Carpenter, and others. “Aren’t they wonderful?” Amory tried politely to appreciate them, and gave up laughingly	Amory really liked the idea of classic-looking faces. "Yeah, I'll show you what I mean." Burne then took out a bunch of photos from his desk. They were pictures of famous people with big beards and messy hair, like Tolstoy and Whitman. "Aren't they amazing?" Amory tried to act like he liked them, but he couldn't and just started laughing.

“Burne, I think they’re the ugliest-looking crowd I ever came across. They look like an old man’s home.” “Oh, Amory, look at that forehead on Emerson; look at Tolstoy’s eyes	"Burne, this is the worst-looking group of people I've ever seen. It's like being in a nursing home." "Hey, Amory, check out that guy Emerson's huge forehead! And look at Tolstoy's eyes!"

His tone was reproachful. Amory shook his head. “No! Call them remarkable-looking or anything you want—but ugly they certainly are	He sounded disappointed. Amory disagreed, "No! You can say they look unusual or whatever, but they're definitely not ugly."

Unabashed, Burne ran his hand lovingly across the spacious foreheads, and piling up the pictures put them back in his desk. Walking at night was one of his favorite pursuits, and one night he persuaded Amory to accompany him. “I hate the dark,” Amory objected. “I didn’t use to—except when I was particularly imaginative, but now, I really do—I’m a regular fool about it	Without any hesitation, Burne gently touched the wide foreheads in the pictures. Then, he stacked them up and put them back in his desk. He loved walking at night, and one time he convinced Amory to go with him. "I hate the dark," Amory complained. "I used to be okay with it, except when I got really carried away with my thoughts, but now I seriously hate it—I'm totally scared of it."

“That’s useless, you know.” “Quite possibly.” “We’ll go east,” Burne suggested, “and down that string of roads through the woods	"That's pointless, you know." "Maybe." "Let's head east," Burne said, "and follow those roads through the forest."

“Doesn’t sound very appealing to me,” admitted Amory reluctantly, “but let’s go.” They set off at a good gait, and for an hour swung along in a brisk argument until the lights of Princeton were luminous white blots behind them	"Doesn't sound fun," Amory admitted, not really wanting to go, "but okay, let's do it." They started walking fast, arguing energetically for an hour until the lights of Princeton were just blurry white spots behind them.

“Any person with any imagination is bound to be afraid,” said Burne earnestly. “And this very walking at night is one of the things I was afraid about	"Anyone who can imagine things is going to be scared sometimes," Burne said seriously. "Walking around at night is one of the things that used to scare me."

I’m going to tell you why I can walk anywhere now and not be afraid.” “Go on,” Amory urged eagerly. They were striding toward the woods, Burne’s nervous, enthusiastic voice warming to his subject	"I'll tell you why I can go anywhere now and not be scared." "Tell me!" Amory said, excited. They walked quickly toward the woods, Burne's voice, usually anxious, now enthusiastic as he got into what he wanted to say.

“I used to come out here alone at night, oh, three months ago, and I always stopped at that crossroad we just passed. There were the woods looming up ahead, just as they do now, there were dogs howling and the shadows and no human sound	"About three months back, I'd come out here alone at night and always stop at that intersection we just drove through. The woods were dark and huge in front of me, just like they are now. Dogs were howling, and it was all shadows and silence."

Of course, I peopled the woods with everything ghastly, just like you do; don’t you?” “I do,” Amory admitted. “Well, I began analyzing it—my imagination persisted in sticking horrors into the dark—so I stuck my imagination into the dark instead, and let it look out at me—I let it play stray dog or escaped convict or ghost, and then saw myself coming along the road. That made it all right—as it always makes everything all right to project yourself completely into another’s place	"Yeah, I used to fill the woods with scary stuff, like you probably do, right?" "Yeah, I do," Amory said. "So, I started thinking about it. My imagination kept putting scary things in the dark, so I put my imagination in the dark instead and let it look back at me. I'd pretend to be a lost dog or a runaway prisoner or a ghost and then imagine myself walking down the road. That fixed it. It always helps to totally put yourself in someone else's shoes."

I knew that if I were the dog or the convict or the ghost I wouldn’t be a menace to Burne Holiday any more than he was a menace to me. Then I thought of my watch. I’d better go back and leave it and then essay the woods. No; I decided, it’s better on the whole that I should lose a watch than that I should turn back—and I did go into them—not only followed the road through them, but walked into them until I wasn’t frightened any more—did it until one night I sat down and dozed off in there; then I knew I was through being afraid of the dark	I realized that whether I was a dog, a prisoner, or a ghost, I wouldn't be a threat to Burne Holiday any more than he was to me. Then I remembered my watch. I should go back and leave it, and then try to walk into the woods. But no, I decided it was better to lose the watch than to turn back. So I went into the woods—not just walked the road through them, but went deep in until I wasn't scared anymore. I kept doing it until one night I sat down and fell asleep there. That's when I knew I was finally over my fear of the dark.

“Lordy,” Amory breathed. “I couldn’t have done that	"Wow," Amory said. "I couldn't have pulled that off."

I’d have come out halfway, and the first time an automobile passed and made the dark thicker when its lamps disappeared, I’d have come in.” “Well,” Burne said suddenly, after a few moments’ silence, “we’re halfway through, let’s turn back.” On the return he launched into a discussion of will. “It’s the whole thing,” he asserted	I would've walked out a bit, and the first time a car went by and the darkness seemed even darker after its headlights were gone, I would've gone back inside." "Okay," Burne said abruptly, after a short silence, "we're halfway done, let's quit." On the way back, he started talking about willpower. "It's everything," he insisted.

“It’s the one dividing line between good and evil. I’ve never met a man who led a rotten life and didn’t have a weak will.” “How about great criminals?” “They’re usually insane. If not, they’re weak	"It's the only thing that separates right from wrong. I've never met a guy who lived a bad life and didn't have a weak will." "What about famous criminals?" "They're usually crazy. If they're not, they're weak."

There is no such thing as a strong, sane criminal.” “Burne, I disagree with you altogether; how about the superman?” “Well?” “He’s evil, I think, yet he’s strong and sane.” “I’ve never met him	"There's no such thing as a criminal who's strong and mentally healthy." "Burne, I totally disagree. What about the 'superman' type?" "Okay?" "He's evil, in my opinion, but he's strong and healthy." "I've never met one."

I’ll bet, though, that he’s stupid or insane.” “I’ve met him over and over and he’s neither	"I bet he's either dumb or crazy." "I've met him a bunch of times, and he's not either of those things."

That’s why I think you’re wrong.” “I’m sure I’m not—and so I don’t believe in imprisonment except for the insane	That's why I disagree with you. I'm confident I'm right, so I only think it's okay to lock up people who are mentally ill.

On this point Amory could not agree. It seemed to him that life and history were rife with the strong criminal, keen, but often self-deluding; in politics and business one found him and among the old statesmen and kings and generals; but Burne never agreed and their courses began to split on that point. Burne was drawing farther and farther away from the world about him	Amory disagreed with this. He thought that life and history were full of powerful, smart criminals who often fooled themselves. You could find them in politics, business, and among leaders like statesmen, kings, and generals. But Burne never agreed, and this difference started to drive them apart. Burne was becoming more and more detached from the world around him.

He resigned the vice-presidency of the senior class and took to reading and walking as almost his only pursuits. He voluntarily attended graduate lectures in philosophy and biology, and sat in all of them with a rather pathetically intent look in his eyes, as if waiting for something the lecturer would never quite come to. Sometimes Amory would see him squirm in his seat; and his face would light up; he was on fire to debate a point	He quit being the senior class vice-president and mostly just read and walked around. He even went to philosophy and biology classes for graduate students, looking really eager, like he expected the professor to say something amazing that never happened. Amory sometimes saw him fidget and then get all excited, ready to argue about something.

He grew more abstracted on the street and was even accused of becoming a snob, but Amory knew it was nothing of the sort, and once when Burne passed him four feet off, absolutely unseeingly, his mind a thousand miles away, Amory almost choked with the romantic joy of watching him. Burne seemed to be climbing heights where others would be forever unable to get a foothold. “I tell you,” Amory declared to Tom, “he’s the first contemporary I’ve ever met whom I’ll admit is my superior in mental capacity	He became more distant when he was out, and people even said he was acting like a snob. But Amory knew that wasn't true. One time, Burne walked right past him, just four feet away, completely not seeing him because he was so lost in thought. Amory almost burst with excitement, watching him like that. It was like Burne was achieving things that other people could never even dream of. Amory told Tom, "Seriously, he's the first person my age I've met who I'll admit is smarter than me."

“It’s a bad time to admit it—people are beginning to think he’s odd.” “He’s way over their heads—you know you think so yourself when you talk to him—Good Lord, Tom, you used to stand out against ‘people.’ Success has completely conventionalized you.” Tom grew rather annoyed	"This isn't a good time to say it, but people are starting to see him as weird." "He's too smart for them. You know you feel that way too when you talk to him. Come on, Tom, you used to not care what 'people' thought. Being successful has made you totally normal." Tom got pretty irritated.

“What’s he trying to do—be excessively holy?” “No! not like anybody you’ve ever seen. Never enters the Philadelphian Society	"Is he trying to act super religious?" "No! Not like anyone you've ever met. He never even goes to the Philadelphian Society."

He has no faith in that rot. He doesn’t believe that public swimming-pools and a kind word in time will right the wrongs of the world; moreover, he takes a drink whenever he feels like it.” “He certainly is getting in wrong	He doesn't buy into that nonsense. He doesn't think simple solutions like community pools and being nice will fix everything wrong with the world. Plus, he drinks when he wants to." "He's definitely making a bad impression.

“Have you talked to him lately?” “No.” “Then you haven’t any conception of him	"Have you talked to him recently?" "No." "Then you have no idea what he's like."

The argument ended nowhere, but Amory noticed more than ever how the sentiment toward Burne had changed on the campus. “It’s odd,” Amory said to Tom one night when they had grown more amicable on the subject, “that the people who violently disapprove of Burne’s radicalism are distinctly the Pharisee class—I mean they’re the best-educated men in college—the editors of the papers, like yourself and Ferrenby, the younger professors. The illiterate athletes like Langueduc think he’s getting eccentric, but they just say, ‘Good old Burne has got some queer ideas in his head,’ and pass on—the Pharisee class—Gee! they ridicule him unmercifully.” The next morning he met Burne hurrying along McCosh walk after a recitation	The argument didn't go anywhere, but Amory really saw how people on campus felt differently about Burne now. "It's weird," Amory told Tom one night after they started getting along better talking about it, "that the people who hate Burne's crazy ideas the most are the ones who think they're so much better than everyone else – I mean, they're the smartest guys in college - the newspaper editors, like you and Ferrenby, and the young professors. The dumb athletes, like Langueduc, just think he's acting strange, but they just say, 'Old Burne's got some weird ideas,' and don't care – but those stuck-up guys! Man, they make fun of him like crazy.” The next morning, he saw Burne walking fast down McCosh walk after class.

“Whither bound, Tsar?” “Over to the Prince office to see Ferrenby,” he waved a copy of the morning’s Princetonian at Amory. “He wrote this editorial	"Where are you going, Tsar?" "I'm heading over to the *Prince* office to see Ferrenby," he said, waving the morning's *Princetonian* newspaper at Amory. "He wrote this editorial."

“Going to flay him alive?” “No—but he’s got me all balled up. Either I’ve misjudged him or he’s suddenly become the world’s worst radical	"Gonna tear him apart?" "No, but he's got me totally confused. Either I was wrong about him, or he's suddenly turned into a crazy extremist."

Burne hurried on, and it was several days before Amory heard an account of the ensuing conversation. Burne had come into the editor’s sanctum displaying the paper cheerfully. “Hello, Jesse	Burne rushed off, and Amory didn't hear what happened next for a few days. Burne had walked into the editor's office, looking happy and showing off the paper. "Hey, Jesse."

“Hello there, Savonarola.” “I just read your editorial.” “Good boy—didn’t know you stooped that low.” “Jesse, you startled me	"Hey there, Savonarola." "I just read what you wrote." "Good job—didn't know you'd sink that low." "Jesse, you scared me!"

“How so?” “Aren’t you afraid the faculty’ll get after you if you pull this irreligious stuff?” “What?” “Like this morning.” “What the devil—that editorial was on the coaching system.” “Yes, but that quotation—” Jesse sat up	"Why?" "Aren't you worried the teachers will come down on you for this anti-religious stuff?" "What are you talking about?" "Like what you did this morning." "What the heck? That article was about the coaching system." "Yeah, but that quote—" Jesse sat up.

“What quotation?” “You know: ‘He who is not with me is against me.’ ” “Well—what about it?” Jesse was puzzled but not alarmed. “Well, you say here—let me see	"What quote?" "You know, the one that says, 'If you're not on my side, you're against me.'" "So? What's the problem?" Jesse was confused, but not worried. "Well, you wrote here—hold on..."

Burne opened the paper and read: “ ‘He who is not with me is against me, as that gentleman said who was notoriously capable of only coarse distinctions and puerile generalities.’ ” “What of it?” Ferrenby began to look alarmed. “Oliver Cromwell said it, didn’t he? or was it Washington, or one of the saints? Good Lord, I’ve forgotten	Burne opened the newspaper and read: “'If you’re not on my side, you’re against me.' Some famous guy said that, but he was known for being simple-minded and making childish generalizations.” “So?” Ferrenby looked worried. “Oliver Cromwell said it, right? Or was it Washington, or some other saint? Man, I can't remember.”

Burne roared with laughter. “Oh, Jesse, oh, good, kind Jesse	Burne laughed loudly. "Oh, Jesse, you're such a good person, Jesse!"

“Who said it, for Pete’s sake?” “Well,” said Burne, recovering his voice, “St. Matthew attributes it to Christ	"Who said that, anyway?" "Well," Burne said, getting his voice back, "Matthew in the Bible says Jesus said it."

“My God!” cried Jesse, and collapsed backward into the wastebasket.	"Oh my God!" Jesse yelled, and fell back into the trash can.

The weeks tore by. Amory wandered occasionally to New York on the chance of finding a new shining green autobus, that its stick-of-candy glamour might penetrate his disposition	Time flew by. Amory sometimes went to New York, hoping to find something exciting and new that would cheer him up.

One day he ventured into a stock-company revival of a play whose name was faintly familiar. The curtain rose—he watched casually as a girl entered. A few phrases rang in his ear and touched a faint chord of memory. Where—? When—? Then he seemed to hear a voice whispering beside him, a very soft, vibrant voice: “Oh, I’m such a poor little fool; do tell me when I do wrong	He went to see an old play he vaguely remembered. The play started, and he casually watched an actress come on stage. Some lines she spoke sounded familiar, triggering a faint memory. Where did he hear that before? When? Then, it felt like a soft, breathy voice whispered in his ear: "Oh, I'm so clueless. Please tell me when I mess up."

The solution came in a flash and he had a quick, glad memory of Isabelle. He found a blank space on his programme, and began to scribble rapidly: “Here in the figured dark I watch once more, There, with the curtain, roll the years away; Two years of years—there was an idle day Of ours, when happy endings didn’t bore Our unfermented souls; I could adore Your eager face beside me, wide-eyed, gay, Smiling a repertoire while the poor play Reached me as a faint ripple reaches shore. Yawning and wondering an evening through, I watch alone	Suddenly, he knew what to do and felt a happy, quick memory of Isabelle. He found an empty spot on his program and started writing fast: “Here in the dim light, I’m watching again. The years are rolling back, like the curtain closing. It feels like forever, but it's only been two years. I remember one lazy day when happy endings didn't bother us, back when we were young and naive. I loved looking at your excited face next to me, with your big, happy eyes, smiling through everything, while the boring play barely registered with me. Now, I'm yawning and wondering, all alone."

and chatterings, of course, Spoil the one scene which, somehow, did have charms; You wept a bit, and I grew sad for you Right here! Where Mr. X defends divorce And What’s-Her-Name falls fainting in his arms.”	And all the talking, naturally, ruins the one part that actually had something good about it. You got a little upset, and I felt bad for you, right here! This is where Mr. X argues for divorce, and What's-Her-Name faints in his arms.

“Ghosts are such dumb things,” said Alec, “they’re slow-witted. I can always outguess a ghost.” “How?” asked Tom. “Well, it depends where	"Ghosts are so stupid," Alec said. "They're slow. I can always figure out what a ghost will do next." "How?" Tom asked. "Well, it depends on where..."

Take a bedroom, for example. If you use any discretion a ghost can never get you in a bedroom.” “Go on, s’pose you think there’s maybe a ghost in your bedroom—what measures do you take on getting home at night?” demanded Amory, interested	"Like, take a bedroom. If you're smart, a ghost can't get to you there." "Okay, say you think there might be a ghost in your room – what do you do when you come home at night?" Amory asked, now curious.

“Take a stick,” answered Alec, with ponderous reverence, “one about the length of a broom-handle. Now, the first thing to do is to get the room cleared—to do this you rush with your eyes closed into your study and turn on the lights—next, approaching the closet, carefully run the stick in the door three or four times. Then, if nothing happens, you can look in. Always, always run the stick in viciously first—never look first!” “Of course, that’s the ancient Celtic school,” said Tom gravely	"Grab a stick," Alec replied, acting really serious, "like the length of a broom. First, clear the room. To do that, charge into your study with your eyes closed and turn on the lights. Then, go to the closet and carefully poke the stick inside the door three or four times. If nothing happens, you can look in. Always, always poke the stick hard first—never look first!" "Of course, that's the old Celtic way," Tom said seriously.

“Yes—but they usually pray first. Anyway, you use this method to clear the closets and also for behind all doors—” “And the bed,” Amory suggested. “Oh, Amory, no!” cried Alec in horror	"Yeah, but usually they pray first. Anyway, you use this method to clean out everything, even the hidden spots." "And the bed," Amory added. "Oh, Amory, no way!" Alec exclaimed, shocked.

“That isn’t the way—the bed requires different tactics—let the bed alone, as you value your reason—if there is a ghost in the room and that’s only about a third of the time, it is almost always under the bed.” “Well” Amory began. Alec waved him into silence	"That's not how you do it. You need a different approach with a bed. Leave the bed alone, seriously, if you want to stay sane. If there's a ghost in the room—and that only happens maybe a third of the time—it's almost always hiding under the bed." "Okay," Amory started to say. Alec cut him off.

“Of course you never look. You stand in the middle of the floor and before he knows what you’re going to do make a sudden leap for the bed—never walk near the bed; to a ghost your ankle is your most vulnerable part—once in bed, you’re safe; he may lie around under the bed all night, but you’re safe as daylight. If you still have doubts pull the blanket over your head.” “All that’s very interesting, Tom	"You never actually look, do you? You just stand in the middle of the room and then, before anyone realizes what you're up to, you suddenly jump to the bed. Never walk close to the bed, because ghosts can get you by the ankles. Once you're in bed, you're safe. The ghost might hang around under the bed all night, but you're totally safe, like it's daytime. And if you're still worried, just pull the blanket over your head." "That's all very interesting, Tom."

“Isn’t it?” Alec beamed proudly. “All my own, too—the Sir Oliver Lodge of the new world	"Right?" Alec said, grinning. "I came up with it all myself - I'm like the top scientist of this generation."

Amory was enjoying college immensely again. The sense of going forward in a direct, determined line had come back; youth was stirring and shaking out a few new feathers. He had even stored enough surplus energy to sally into a new pose	Amory was really enjoying college again. He felt like he was moving forward with purpose, and youth was giving him a fresh start. He even had enough extra energy to try out a new attitude.

“What’s the idea of all this ‘distracted’ stuff, Amory?” asked Alec one day, and then as Amory pretended to be cramped over his book in a daze: “Oh, don’t try to act Burne, the mystic, to me.” Amory looked up innocently	"What's with acting all distracted, Amory?" Alec asked one day. Amory pretended to be absorbed in his book, like he was in a trance, so Alec added, "Don't try to play the mysterious genius with me." Amory looked up, pretending to be innocent.

“What?” “What?” mimicked Alec. “Are you trying to read yourself into a rhapsody with—let’s see the book	"What?" Alec repeated, mocking him. "Are you trying to get all worked up about yourself by reading... hold on, let me see that book."

He snatched it; regarded it derisively. “Well?” said Amory a little stiffly. “The Life of St. Teresa,” read Alec aloud	Alec grabbed the book and looked at it with scorn. "Well?" Amory asked, sounding a bit formal. " 'The Life of St. Teresa,' " Alec read out loud.

“Oh, my gosh!” “Say, Alec.” “What?” “Does it bother you?” “Does what bother me?” “My acting dazed and all that?” “Why, no—of course it doesn’t bother me.” “Well, then, don’t spoil it. If I enjoy going around telling people guilelessly that I think I’m a genius, let me do it	"Oh my god!" "Hey, Alec." "Yeah?" "Does it bug you?" "Does what bug me?" "Me acting spacey and stuff?" "No, not at all, why would it?" "Okay, then don't ruin it. If I like walking around telling people, like I'm totally innocent, that I think I'm a genius, just let me do it."

“You’re getting a reputation for being eccentric,” said Alec, laughing, “if that’s what you mean.”Amory finally prevailed, and Alec agreed to accept his face value in the presence of others if he was allowed rest periods when they were alone; so Amory “ran it out” at a great rate, bringing the most eccentric characters to dinner, wild-eyed grad students, preceptors with strange theories of God and government, to the cynical amazement of the supercilious Cottage Club. As February became slashed by sun and moved cheerfully into March, Amory went several times to spend weekends with Monsignor; once he took Burne, with great success, for he took equal pride and delight in displaying them to each other. Monsignor took him several times to see Thornton Hancock, and once or twice to the house of a Mrs. Lawrence, a type of Rome-haunting American whom Amory liked immediately.	"People are starting to think you're weird," Alec said, chuckling, "if that's what you're worried about." Amory finally convinced Alec to pretend to like him in public, as long as they got breaks from each other when they were by themselves. So Amory went all-out, introducing the strangest people to Alec – crazy grad students and professors with odd ideas about religion and politics – which just shocked the snobby Cottage Club members. As February turned into sunny March, Amory spent several weekends with Monsignor. He even brought Burne once, which worked out great because he enjoyed showing them off to each other. Monsignor took Amory to see Thornton Hancock a few times, and also to the house of a Mrs. Lawrence, an American lady who loved Rome and who Amory instantly liked.

Then one day came a letter from Monsignor, which appended an interesting P.S.: “Do you know,” it ran, “that your third cousin, Clara Page, widowed six months and very poor, is living in Philadelphia?	One day he got a letter from the Monsignor that had an interesting add-on at the end: "Did you know your third cousin, Clara Page, who's been a widow for six months and doesn't have much money, lives in Philadelphia?"

I don’t think you’ve ever met her, but I wish, as a favor to me, you’d go to see her. To my mind, she’s rather a remarkable woman, and just about your age.” Amory sighed and decided to go, as a favor.	"I don't think you know her, but would you do me a favor and visit her? I think she's a really interesting person, and about your age." Amory sighed and agreed to go, to help him out.

She was immemorial. Amory wasn’t good enough for Clara, Clara of ripply golden hair, but then no man was. Her goodness was above the prosy morals of the husband-seeker, apart from the dull literature of female virtue. Sorrow lay lightly around her, and when Amory found her in Philadelphia he thought her steely blue eyes held only happiness; a latent strength, a realism, was brought to its fullest development by the facts that she was compelled to face	She felt timeless. Amory wasn't worthy of Clara, with her wavy, golden hair, but no one really was. Her kindness went beyond the usual rules about finding a husband, separate from typical ideas about how women should behave. She carried sadness easily, and when Amory met her in Philadelphia, he thought her strong blue eyes showed only joy. A hidden strength and practical attitude had fully grown because of the tough things she had to deal with.

She was alone in the world, with two small children, little money, and, worst of all, a host of friends. He saw her that winter in Philadelphia entertaining a houseful of men for an evening, when he knew she had not a servant in the house except the little colored girl guarding the babies overhead	She was completely on her own with two young kids, hardly any money, and a ton of friends. That winter in Philadelphia, he saw her throwing a party for a house full of guys, even though she didn't have any help except for a young Black girl watching the kids upstairs.

He saw one of the greatest libertines in that city, a man who was habitually drunk and notorious at home and abroad, sitting opposite her for an evening, discussing girls’ boarding-schools with a sort of innocent excitement. What a twist Clara had to her mind! She could make fascinating and almost brilliant conversation out of the thinnest air that ever floated through a drawing-room	He saw a really wild guy, super famous for being drunk and a bad boy everywhere, sitting across from her all evening. They were talking about girls' schools like it was the most exciting thing ever. Clara was so weird! She could make the most boring, empty topics sound interesting, even smart.

The idea that the girl was poverty-stricken had appealed to Amory’s sense of situation. He arrived in Philadelphia expecting to be told that 921 Ark Street was in a miserable lane of hovels	Amory liked the idea that the girl was poor. He got to Philadelphia expecting to find her house on a street full of terrible, run-down shacks.

He was even disappointed when it proved to be nothing of the sort. It was an old house that had been in her husband’s family for years	He was bummed when it turned out to be ordinary. It was just an old house that had belonged to her husband’s family for ages.

An elderly aunt, who objected to having it sold, had put ten years’ taxes with a lawyer and pranced off to Honolulu, leaving Clara to struggle with the heating-problem as best she could. So no wild-haired woman with a hungry baby at her breast and a sad Amelia-like look greeted him. Instead, Amory would have thought from his reception that she had not a care in the world	An old aunt didn't want the house sold. She gave a lawyer enough money to cover ten years of property taxes and then took off to Honolulu. This left Clara to deal with the heating by herself. So, instead of finding a stressed-out woman with a baby, looking worn down, Amory was welcomed like she didn't have any problems at all.

A calm virility and a dreamy humor, marked contrasts to her level-headedness—into these moods she slipped sometimes as a refuge. She could do the most prosy things (though she was wise enough never to stultify herself with such “household arts” as knitting and embroidery), yet immediately afterward pick up a book and let her imagination rove as a formless cloud with the wind. Deepest of all in her personality was the golden radiance that she diffused around her	She had a quiet strength and a funny, almost dreamy side, which was very different from how sensible she usually was. She'd escape into these moods sometimes when she needed a break. She could handle everyday tasks easily (but she was smart enough not to bore herself with stuff like knitting). Right after that, she'd grab a book and let her imagination wander freely. But what really defined her was the warmth and happiness she spread around her.

As an open fire in a dark room throws romance and pathos into the quiet faces at its edge, so she cast her lights and shadows around the rooms that held her, until she made of her prosy old uncle a man of quaint and meditative charm, metamorphosed the stray telegraph boy into a Puck-like creature of delightful originality. At first this quality of hers somehow irritated Amory	Like a fire making faces in a dark room seem romantic and sad, she made the places she was in feel special. She even made her boring old uncle seem interesting and thoughtful, and turned a random delivery boy into a fun and unique character. At first, this ability of hers bothered Amory.

He considered his own uniqueness sufficient, and it rather embarrassed him when she tried to read new interests into him for the benefit of what other adorers were present. He felt as if a polite but insistent stage-manager were attempting to make him give a new interpretation of a part he had conned for years. But Clara talking, Clara telling a slender tale of a hatpin and an inebriated man and herself	He thought he was special enough as he was, so it bothered him when she tried to make him seem more interesting in front of other guys who liked her. It felt like a pushy director was trying to force him to act differently than he had for years. But then Clara started talking, telling a little story about a hatpin, a drunk guy, and herself.

People tried afterward to repeat her anecdotes but for the life of them they could make them sound like nothing whatever. They gave her a sort of innocent attention and the best smiles many of them had smiled for long; there were few tears in Clara, but people smiled misty-eyed at her. Very occasionally Amory stayed for little half-hours after the rest of the court had gone, and they would have bread and jam and tea late in the afternoon or “maple-sugar lunches,” as she called them, at night. “You are remarkable, aren’t you!” Amory was becoming trite from where he perched in the centre of the dining-room table one six o’clock	Later, people tried to retell her stories, but they couldn't make them sound interesting at all. They paid attention to her in a pure way and smiled their best smiles, some that they hadn't used in a long time. Clara didn't cry much, but she made people smile with tears in their eyes. Once in a while, Amory would stay for a short time after everyone else had left. They'd have bread, jam, and tea in the late afternoon, or what she called "maple-sugar lunches" at night. One day at six o'clock, Amory, sitting on the dining room table, said, "You're really something special, aren't you!" - even though it was starting to sound a bit cliché.

“Not a bit,” she answered. She was searching out napkins in the sideboard. “I’m really most humdrum and commonplace. One of those people who have no interest in anything but their children	"Not at all," she replied, looking for napkins in the cabinet. "I'm actually pretty ordinary and boring. I'm one of those people who only care about their kids."

“Tell that to somebody else,” scoffed Amory. “You know you’re perfectly effulgent.” He asked her the one thing that he knew might embarrass her	"Yeah, right," Amory said sarcastically. "You know you're totally radiant." Then he asked her something he knew would make her uncomfortable.

It was the remark that the first bore made to Adam. “Tell me about yourself	It was like the first boring guy ever talking to Adam. He said, "So, tell me about you."

And she gave the answer that Adam must have given. “There’s nothing to tell	She gave the only possible answer: "There's nothing to say."

But eventually Adam probably told the bore all the things he thought about at night when the locusts sang in the sandy grass, and he must have remarked patronizingly how different he was from Eve, forgetting how different she was from him. at any rate, Clara told Amory much about herself that evening	Eventually, Adam probably told some annoying person all his deep thoughts from when he was alone at night, listening to the crickets. He probably also acted like he was better than Eve, forgetting that she was just as different from him as he was from her. Anyway, that night Clara told Amory a lot about herself.

She had had a harried life from sixteen on, and her education had stopped sharply with her leisure. Browsing in her library, Amory found a tattered gray book out of which fell a yellow sheet that he impudently opened. It was a poem that she had written at school about a gray convent wall on a gray day, and a girl with her cloak blown by the wind sitting atop of it and thinking about the many-colored world. As a rule such sentiment bored him, but this was done with so much simplicity and atmosphere, that it brought a picture of Clara to his mind, of Clara on such a cool, gray day with her keen blue eyes staring out, trying to see her tragedies come marching over the gardens outside	From age sixteen, she'd had a tough life, and her education ended abruptly when she had free time. Looking through her books, Amory found an old, worn-out book. A yellow piece of paper fell out, and he rudely unfolded it. It was a poem she'd written in school about a gray convent wall on a cloudy day. A girl in the poem, with her cloak blowing in the wind, sat on the wall, thinking about the colorful world. Usually, that kind of emotional stuff annoyed him, but this was so simple and evocative that he pictured Clara. He imagined Clara on a similar cool, gray day, her bright blue eyes looking out, trying to see her problems coming toward her across the gardens.

He envied that poem. How he would have loved to have come along and seen her on the wall and talked nonsense or romance to her, perched above him in the air	He wished he'd written that poem. He'd have loved to meet her by the wall, just chatting or flirting with her while she was up there, looking down at him.

He began to be frightfully jealous of everything about Clara: of her past, of her babies, of the men and women who flocked to drink deep of her cool kindness and rest their tired minds as at an absorbing play. “Nobody seems to bore you,” he objected. “About half the world do,” she admitted, “but I think that’s a pretty good average, don’t you?” and she turned to find something in Browning that bore on the subject	He got super jealous of everything about Clara: her history, her kids, and all the people who were drawn to her easygoing nature and felt refreshed just being around her. "You seem to enjoy everyone," he complained. "I find about half the people boring," she said, "but I think that's a good ratio, don't you?" Then, she looked to find something in Browning's writing that related to the topic.

She was the only person he ever met who could look up passages and quotations to show him in the middle of the conversation, and yet not be irritating to distraction. She did it constantly, with such a serious enthusiasm that he grew fond of watching her golden hair bent over a book, brow wrinkled ever so little at hunting her sentence. Through early March he took to going to Philadelphia for weekends	She was the only person he knew who could look up quotes and passages to prove a point during a conversation without being annoying. She did it all the time, but she was so genuinely excited about it that he actually liked watching her blonde hair as she searched for her quote in a book, her forehead slightly wrinkled in concentration. Starting in early March, he began going to Philadelphia for weekends.

Almost always there was someone else there and she seemed not anxious to see him alone, for many occasions presented themselves when a word from her would have given him another delicious half-hour of adoration. But he fell gradually in love and began to speculate wildly on marriage. Though this design flowed through his brain even to his lips, still he knew afterward that the desire had not been deeply rooted	Usually, someone else was around, and she didn't seem eager to be alone with him. He had plenty of chances for more time with her if she'd just hinted she wanted it. But he was falling in love little by little, and he started seriously thinking about marrying her. He even imagined talking about it, but later realized the idea wasn't that important to him.

Once he dreamt that it had come true and woke up in a cold panic, for in his dream she had been a silly, flaxen Clara, with the gold gone out of her hair and platitudes falling insipidly from her changeling tongue. But she was the first fine woman he ever knew and one of the few good people who ever interested him. She made her goodness such an asset	He once dreamed it actually happened, and woke up terrified. In his dream, she was a dumb, blonde version of herself, her hair dull, and boring clichés coming out of her fake mouth. But she was the first truly amazing woman he ever met, and one of the few genuinely good people he ever found interesting. She used her goodness so well.

Amory had decided that most good people either dragged theirs after them as a liability, or else distorted it to artificial geniality, and of course there were the ever-present prig and Pharisee—(but Amory never included them as being among the saved).	Amory thought good people either carried their goodness around like a burden, or faked it with fake friendliness. And then there were always the judgmental and self-righteous types – but Amory didn't think they were really good people.

“Over her gray and velvet dress, Under her molten, beaten hair, Color of rose in mock distress Flushes and fades and makes her fair; Fills the air from her to him With light and languor and little sighs, Just so subtly he scarcely knows. Laughing lightning, color of rose.” “Do you like me?” “Of course I do,” said Clara seriously. “Why?” “Well, we have some qualities in common	Her dress was gray velvet, her hair looked like melted gold, and a rosy blush came and went on her face, making her beautiful. The air between them felt charged with a relaxed energy and soft sighs, so subtle he barely noticed. Like laughing lightning, the color of a rose." "Do you like me?" "Of course I do," Clara said, sounding serious. "Why?" "Because we have some things in common."

Things that are spontaneous in each of us—or were originally.” “You’re implying that I haven’t used myself very well?” Clara hesitated. “Well, I can’t judge. A man, of course, has to go through a lot more, and I’ve been sheltered	"The things we do naturally, or used to." "Are you saying I haven't lived up to my potential?" Clara paused. "I can't really say. Men have a lot more to deal with, and I've been protected."

“Oh, don’t stall, please, Clara,” Amory interrupted; “but do talk about me a little, won’t you?” “Surely, I’d adore to.” She didn’t smile	"Come on, Clara, don't stop," Amory said, cutting her off. "Please talk about me, okay?" "Sure, I'd love to." She didn't smile.

“That’s sweet of you. First answer some questions. Am I painfully conceited?” “Well—no, you have tremendous vanity, but it’ll amuse the people who notice its preponderance	"That's nice of you. First, answer this: Am I a huge snob?" "Not exactly. You're really vain, but people will find it funny."

“I see.” “You’re really humble at heart	"Okay." "Deep down, you're really modest."

You sink to the third hell of depression when you think you’ve been slighted. In fact, you haven’t much self-respect.” “Centre of target twice, Clara	You get super depressed when you think someone's dissed you. Really, you don't think much of yourself. Bullseye, Clara, twice.

How do you do it? You never let me say a word.” “Of course not—I can never judge a man while he’s talking	"How do you do that? You never let me talk." "Exactly! I can't figure someone out if they're talking."

But I’m not through; the reason you have so little real self-confidence, even though you gravely announce to the occasional philistine that you think you’re a genius, is that you’ve attributed all sorts of atrocious faults to yourself and are trying to live up to them. For instance, you’re always saying that you are a slave to highballs	I'm not done yet. The reason you don't really believe in yourself, even though you tell people you think you're brilliant, is that you've convinced yourself you have all these terrible flaws and you're trying to act like they're true. Like, you're always saying you're addicted to cocktails.

“But I am, potentially.” “And you say you’re a weak character, that you’ve no will.” “Not a bit of will—I’m a slave to my emotions, to my likes, to my hatred of boredom, to most of my desires—” “You are not!” She brought one little fist down onto the other	"But I could be," he replied. "And you say you're weak, that you have no willpower." "Zero willpower. I just do what I feel like, what I enjoy, what keeps me from being bored, whatever I want." "That's not true!" She slammed one fist into the other.

“You’re a slave, a bound helpless slave to one thing in the world, your imagination.” “You certainly interest me. If this isn’t boring you, go on	"You're trapped, completely controlled by your own imagination." "You've got my attention. If you're not tired of talking, keep going."

“I notice that when you want to stay over an extra day from college you go about it in a sure way. You never decide at first while the merits of going or staying are fairly clear in your mind. You let your imagination shinny on the side of your desires for a few hours, and then you decide. Naturally your imagination, after a little freedom, thinks up a million reasons why you should stay, so your decision when it comes isn’t true	"I've noticed you've got a trick for skipping an extra day of college. You don't make up your mind right away, when you can see both sides of the argument. You let yourself daydream about what you *want* to do for a while. Then you decide. Of course, after daydreaming, your mind comes up with a ton of reasons to stay, so the decision you make isn't really honest."

It’s biased.” “Yes,” objected Amory, “but isn’t it lack of willpower to let my imagination shinny on the wrong side?” “My dear boy, there’s your big mistake. This has nothing to do with willpower; that’s a crazy, useless word, anyway; you lack judgment—the judgment to decide at once when you know your imagination will play you false, given half a chance	"It's unfair." "Yeah," Amory replied, "but isn't it a weakness to let my imagination run wild in a bad way?" "Listen, that's where you're wrong. This isn't about willpower; that's a dumb, pointless word. You just don't have the sense to immediately realize when your imagination will trick you if you give it the slightest opportunity."

“Well, I’ll be darned!” exclaimed Amory in surprise, “that’s the last thing I expected.” Clara didn’t gloat. She changed the subject immediately	"Wow!" Amory said, surprised. "That's the last thing I thought would happen." Clara didn't brag about it. She quickly changed the conversation.

But she had started him thinking and he believed she was partly right. He felt like a factory-owner who after accusing a clerk of dishonesty finds that his own son, in the office, is changing the books once a week	She made him think, and he thought she was partly correct. He felt like a business owner who, after accusing an employee of stealing, realizes his own son in the office is falsifying the accounts every week.

His poor, mistreated will that he had been holding up to the scorn of himself and his friends, stood before him innocent, and his judgment walked off to prison with the unconfinable imp, imagination, dancing in mocking glee beside him. Clara’s was the only advice he ever asked without dictating the answer himself—except, perhaps, in his talks with Monsignor Darcy. How he loved to do any sort of thing with Clara! Shopping with her was a rare, epicurean dream	He realized he'd been unfairly hard on his own desires, making fun of them with his friends and even himself. Now, those desires seemed innocent. He felt guilty for judging them so harshly, like his good sense was being locked up while his wild imagination celebrated the victory. Clara was the only person whose advice he truly sought, without already knowing what he wanted to hear – except maybe when talking with Monsignor Darcy. He loved doing anything with Clara! Even shopping with her felt like a luxurious and amazing dream.

In every store where she had ever traded she was whispered about as the beautiful Mrs. Page. “I’ll bet she won’t stay single long.” “Well, don’t scream it out	Everyone talked about how beautiful Mrs. Page was at every store she went to. They'd say things like, "I bet she'll get married again soon." "Hey, keep it down!"

She ain’t lookin’ for no advice.” “Ain’t she beautiful!” Enter a floorwalker—silence till he moves forward, smirking. “Society person, ain’t she?” “Yeah, but poor now, I guess; so they say.” “Gee! girls, ain’t she some kid!” And Clara beamed on all alike	She's not asking for anyone's opinion." "Isn't she gorgeous!" A store manager walks in – everyone's quiet until he passes, smiling slyly. "She's from high society, right?" "Yeah, but I guess she's not rich anymore; at least that's the rumor." "Wow! Girls, isn't she something special!" And Clara smiled at everyone.

Amory believed that tradespeople gave her discounts, sometimes to her knowledge and sometimes without it. He knew she dressed very well, had always the best of everything in the house, and was inevitably waited upon by the head floorwalker at the very least. Sometimes they would go to church together on Sunday and he would walk beside her and revel in her cheeks moist from the soft water in the new air	Amory thought shop owners gave her deals, sometimes she knew about it, sometimes not. He knew she dressed expensively, always had the nicest things at home, and always got special attention from the store manager, or someone important like that. Sometimes they went to church together on Sundays, and he walked next to her, enjoying her fresh, slightly dewy face.

She was very devout, always had been, and God knows what heights she attained and what strength she drew down to herself when she knelt and bent her golden hair into the stained-glass light. “St. Cecelia,” he cried aloud one day, quite involuntarily, and the people turned and peered, and the priest paused in his sermon and Clara and Amory turned to fiery red	She was super religious, always had been. Who knows how spiritual she got or how much power she felt when she prayed, her blonde hair glowing in the colored light from the windows. "St. Cecelia!" he blurted out one day without thinking. People looked at him, the priest stopped talking, and Clara and Amory turned bright red with embarrassment.

That was the last Sunday they had, for he spoiled it all that night. He couldn’t help it. They were walking through the March twilight where it was as warm as June, and the joy of youth filled his soul so that he felt he must speak	That was their last good Sunday together, because he messed everything up that night. He couldn't stop himself. They were walking in the warm evening air, like it was June, and he was so happy that he had to say something.

“I think,” he said and his voice trembled, “that if I lost faith in you I’d lose faith in God.” She looked at him with such a startled face that he asked her the matter. “Nothing,” she said slowly, “only this: five men have said that to me before, and it frightens me	"I think," he said, his voice shaking, "if I stopped believing in you, I'd stop believing in God." She looked shocked, so he asked what was wrong. "Nothing," she said slowly, "except five other guys have said that to me, and it scares me."

“Oh, Clara, is that your fate!” She did not answer. “I suppose love to you is—” he began. She turned like a flash	"Clara, is that what you're stuck with?" She didn't reply. "I guess love to you is..." he started to say. She spun around quickly.

“I have never been in love.” They walked along, and he realized slowly how much she had told him	"I've never been in love." They walked in silence, and he gradually understood how much she had revealed to him.

never in love. She seemed suddenly a daughter of light alone. His entity dropped out of her plane and he longed only to touch her dress with almost the realization that Joseph must have had of Mary’s eternal significance. But quite mechanically he heard himself saying: “And I love you—any latent greatness that I’ve got is	never going to come out of me, but only out of you.” never been in love. Suddenly, she seemed like someone completely pure and radiant. He felt disconnected from her world and just wanted to touch her dress, almost understanding how Joseph must have felt about Mary's importance. But, without thinking, he heard himself say, "And I love you—any potential I have will only come from you, not from me.”

oh, I can’t talk, but Clara, if I come back in two years in a position to marry you—” She shook her head. “No,” she said; “I’d never marry again. I’ve got my two children and I want myself for them	"I can't talk about this right now, but Clara, if I'm ready to marry you in two years..." She cut him off, shaking her head. "No," she said, "I'm never getting married again. I have my two kids, and I want to be there for them."

I like you—I like all clever men, you more than any—but you know me well enough to know that I’d never marry a clever man—” She broke off suddenly. “Amory.” “What?” “You’re not in love with me	I like you. I like smart guys in general, and I like you the most. But you know I would never marry someone smart." She stopped talking. "Amory." "Yeah?" "You're not in love with me, are you?"

You never wanted to marry me, did you?” “It was the twilight,” he said wonderingly. “I didn’t feel as though I were speaking aloud	You never really wanted to marry me, did you?" "It was the evening," he said, sounding surprised. "I felt like I wasn't really talking."

But I love you—or adore you—or worship you—” “There you go—running through your catalogue of emotions in five seconds.” He smiled unwillingly	"But I love you—or I really like you—or I think you're amazing." "There you go again—listing all your feelings super fast." He smiled, even though he didn't want to.

“Don’t make me out such a lightweight, Clara; you are depressing sometimes.” “You’re not a lightweight, of all things,” she said intently, taking his arm and opening wide her eyes—he could see their kindliness in the fading dusk	"Don't think I'm so shallow, Clara. You can be a downer." "You're definitely not shallow," she said seriously, grabbing his arm and opening her eyes wide. Even as it got dark, he could see she was being kind.

“A lightweight is an eternal nay.” “There’s so much spring in the air—there’s so much lazy sweetness in your heart	"A flake always says no." "There's such a fresh feeling in the air—you're so sweet and relaxed."

She dropped his arm. “You’re all fine now, and I feel glorious. Give me a cigarette. You’ve never seen me smoke, have you? Well, I do, about once a month	She let go of his arm. "You're okay now, and I feel great. Give me a cigarette. You've never seen me smoke, right? Well, I do, like maybe once a month."

And then that wonderful girl and Amory raced to the corner like two mad children gone wild with pale-blue twilight. “I’m going to the country for tomorrow,” she announced, as she stood panting, safe beyond the flare of the corner lamppost. “These days are too magnificent to miss, though perhaps I feel them more in the city.” “Oh, Clara!” Amory said; “what a devil you could have been if the Lord had just bent your soul a little the other way!” “Maybe,” she answered; “but I think not	That amazing girl and Amory ran to the corner like crazy kids in the soft, blue evening light. "I'm going to the country tomorrow," she said, catching her breath in the shadows away from the streetlight. "These beautiful days are too good to miss, even though I might appreciate them more here in the city." "Clara!" Amory said, "You could have been so bad if you were just a little bit different!" "Maybe," she replied, "but I doubt it."

I’m never really wild and never have been. That little outburst was pure spring.” “And you are, too,” said he. They were walking along now	"I'm not really crazy or anything, never have been. That little moment was just the feeling of spring." "You are too," he said. They were walking now.

“No—you’re wrong again, how can a person of your own self-reputed brains be so constantly wrong about me? I’m the opposite of everything spring ever stood for. It’s unfortunate, if I happen to look like what pleased some soppy old Greek sculptor, but I assure you that if it weren’t for my face I’d be a quiet nun in the convent without”—then she broke into a run and her raised voice floated back to him as he followed—“my precious babies, which I must go back and see.” She was the only girl he ever knew with whom he could understand how another man might be preferred	"No, you're wrong again. How can you, who thinks you're so smart, be so wrong about me all the time? I'm the opposite of everything spring represents. It's too bad if I happen to look like what some sentimental old Greek sculptor liked, but I promise you, if I wasn't pretty, I'd be a quiet nun in a convent without"—She started running and he heard her shout as he followed, "my sweet babies, who I have to go back and see." She was the only girl he knew who made him understand how someone else might be preferred over him.

Often Amory met wives whom he had known as debutantes, and looking intently at them imagined that he found something in their faces which said: “Oh, if I could only have gotten you!” Oh, the enormous conceit of the man! But that night seemed a night of stars and singing and Clara’s bright soul still gleamed on the ways they had trod. “Golden, golden is the air—” he chanted to the little pools of water. “Golden is the air, golden notes from golden mandolins, golden frets of golden violins, fair, oh, wearily fair	Amory would run into women he used to know when they were just starting out, and he'd stare, thinking he saw a look in their eyes that said, "I wish I could have ended up with you!" What a big head he had! But that night felt magical, full of stars and music, and Clara's memory still shone bright on their past. "Golden, golden is the air—" he sang to the puddles. "Golden is the air, golden notes from golden mandolins, golden frets of golden violins, beautiful, oh, so tiredly beautiful."

Skeins from braided basket, mortals may not hold; oh, what young extravagant God, who would know or ask it?. who could give such gold.”	Bundles of beauty, too precious for people to keep. What young, reckless God would understand or care enough to give away something so valuable?"

Slowly and inevitably, yet with a sudden surge at the last, while Amory talked and dreamed, war rolled swiftly up the beach and washed the sands where Princeton played. Every night the gymnasium echoed as platoon after platoon swept over the floor and shuffled out the basketball markings. When Amory went to Washington the next weekend he caught some of the spirit of crisis which changed to repulsion in the Pullman car coming back, for the berths across from him were occupied by stinking aliens—Greeks, he guessed, or Russians	Gradually but surely, and then suddenly at the end, while Amory was talking and daydreaming, the war quickly arrived and ruined Princeton. Every night the gym was full of marching soldiers, their feet scraping over the basketball court lines. When Amory went to Washington the following weekend, he felt the sense of urgency, but it turned into disgust on the train back. The seats across from him were taken by smelly foreigners - probably Greeks or Russians, he thought.

He thought how much easier patriotism had been to a homogeneous race, how much easier it would have been to fight as the Colonies fought, or as the Confederacy fought. And he did no sleeping that night, but listened to the aliens guffaw and snore while they filled the car with the heavy scent of latest America	He realized it was simpler to feel patriotic when everyone was the same. It would have been easier to fight like they did in the Revolution or the Civil War. He couldn't sleep that night, listening to the foreigners laughing loudly and snoring, filling the train car with the strong smell of modern America.

In Princeton everyone bantered in public and told themselves privately that their deaths at least would be heroic. The literary students read Rupert Brooke passionately; the lounge-lizards worried over whether the government would permit the English-cut uniform for officers; a few of the hopelessly lazy wrote to the obscure branches of the War Department, seeking an easy commission and a soft berth. Then, after a week, Amory saw Burne and knew at once that argument would be futile—Burne had come out as a pacifist. The socialist magazines, a great smattering of Tolstoy, and his own intense longing for a cause that would bring out whatever strength lay in him, had finally decided him to preach peace as a subjective ideal	At Princeton, everyone joked around in front of others but secretly thought their own deaths would be brave. The literature students were obsessed with Rupert Brooke's poetry. The preppy guys fretted about whether officers would be allowed to wear fancy British-style uniforms. A few of the really lazy guys wrote to unimportant parts of the military, hoping to get an easy job and avoid real danger. Then, after a week, Amory saw Burne and immediately knew that arguing would be pointless. Burne had become a pacifist. Reading socialist magazines, a lot of Tolstoy, and desperately wanting to find something to fight for that would show his true strength, had convinced him to promote peace as a personal goal.

“When the German army entered Belgium,” he began, “if the inhabitants had gone peaceably about their business, the German army would have been disorganized in—” “I know,” Amory interrupted, “I’ve heard it all. But I’m not going to talk propaganda with you. There’s a chance that you’re right—but even so we’re hundreds of years before the time when nonresistance can touch us as a reality	"When the German army invaded Belgium," he started, "if people had just kept calm and gone about their lives, the German army would have fallen apart because—" "I know, I know," Amory cut him off. "I've heard this before. But I'm not going to debate politics with you. Maybe you're right, but even if you are, we're nowhere near a time when not fighting back could actually work for us."

“But, Amory, listen—” “Burne, we’d just argue—” “Very well.” “Just one thing—I don’t ask you to think of your family or friends, because I know they don’t count a picayune with you beside your sense of duty—but, Burne, how do you know that the magazines you read and the societies you join and these idealists you meet aren’t just plain German?” “Some of them are, of course	"Hey, Amory, listen..." "Burne, we'll just end up fighting..." "Fine." "Just one thing—I'm not going to tell you to think about your family or friends, because I know you don't care about them at all compared to what you think is right. But, Burne, how do you know that the magazines you read, the groups you're in, and these idealistic people you're hanging out with aren't just secret German agents?" "Some of them probably are, yeah."

“How do you know they aren’t all pro-German—just a lot of weak ones—with German-Jewish names.” “That’s the chance, of course,” he said slowly. “How much or how little I’m taking this stand because of propaganda I’ve heard, I don’t know; naturally I think that it’s my most innermost conviction—it seems a path spread before me just now	"How do you know they aren't secretly supporting Germany? Maybe they're just weak people with German-Jewish names." "That's the risk, obviously," he replied thoughtfully. "I'm not sure how much my opinion is actually my own, or just based on what I've been told. I believe it's my real belief, and it feels like the right thing to do right now."

Amory’s heart sank. “But think of the cheapness of it—no one’s really going to martyr you for being a pacifist—it’s just going to throw you in with the worst—” “I doubt it,” he interrupted. “Well, it all smells of Bohemian New York to me.” “I know what you mean, and that’s why I’m not sure I’ll agitate	Amory felt bummed. "But it's so pointless. Nobody's actually going to make you suffer for being against the war. It'll just put you with the lowest of the low." "I don't think so," the other person cut in. "Well, it all seems like some artsy New York scene to me." "I get what you're saying, and that's why I'm not sure I'll even get involved."

“You’re one man, Burne—going to talk to people who won’t listen—with all God’s given you.” “That’s what Stephen must have thought many years ago. But he preached his sermon and they killed him	"Burne, you're just one person trying to talk to people who won't hear you, even with all your talents." "That's probably what Stephen thought a long time ago. He gave his speech, and they killed him."

He probably thought as he was dying what a waste it all was. But you see, I’ve always felt that Stephen’s death was the thing that occurred to Paul on the road to Damascus, and sent him to preach the word of Christ all over the world.” “Go on	He probably thought he'd wasted his life as he died. But I always felt Stephen's death was like what happened to Paul on the road to Damascus, the thing that made him travel everywhere and preach about Christ." "Tell me more."

“That’s all—this is my particular duty. Even if right now I’m just a pawn—just sacrificed	That's it. This is what I have to do. Even if I'm being used right now, and thrown away.

God! Amory—you don’t think I like the Germans!” “Well, I can’t say anything else—I get to the end of all the logic about nonresistance, and there, like an excluded middle, stands the huge spectre of man as he is and always will be. And this spectre stands right beside the one logical necessity of Tolstoy’s, and the other logical necessity of Nietzsche’s—” Amory broke off suddenly. “When are you going?” “I’m going next week.” “I’ll see you, of course	"God, Amory, you don't think I like the Germans, do you?" "Well, what else can I say? I follow the whole idea of not fighting back, but then I hit this wall. It's like the reality of what people are really like, what they always will be. That reality clashes with Tolstoy's logical idea, and with Nietzsche's too..." Amory stopped talking. "When are you leaving?" "Next week." "I'll see you before you go, obviously."

As he walked away it seemed to Amory that the look in his face bore a great resemblance to that in Kerry’s when he had said goodbye under Blair Arch two years before. Amory wondered unhappily why he could never go into anything with the primal honesty of those two. “Burne’s a fanatic,” he said to Tom, “and he’s dead wrong and, I’m inclined to think, just an unconscious pawn in the hands of anarchistic publishers and German-paid rag wavers—but he haunts me—just leaving everything worth while—” Burne left in a quietly dramatic manner a week later. He sold all his possessions and came down to the room to say goodbye, with a battered old bicycle, on which he intended to ride to his home in Pennsylvania	Watching him leave, Amory thought he looked a lot like Kerry did when they said goodbye under Blair Arch a couple of years ago. Amory sadly wondered why he could never be as genuinely honest about anything as those two were. "Burne's obsessed," he told Tom, "and he's completely wrong. I even think he's just being used by publishers who want chaos and people paid by Germany to stir things up. But he bothers me - he's giving up everything important." Burne left quietly but dramatically a week later. He sold everything he owned and came to their room to say goodbye, with an old, beat-up bike he planned to ride home to Pennsylvania.

“Peter the Hermit bidding farewell to Cardinal Richelieu,” suggested Alec, who was lounging in the window-seat as Burne and Amory shook hands. But Amory was not in a mood for that, and as he saw Burne’s long legs propel his ridiculous bicycle out of sight beyond Alexander Hall, he knew he was going to have a bad week	"Looks like a religious leader saying goodbye to a powerful politician," Alec said, relaxing in the window seat while Burne and Amory shook hands. But Amory wasn't in the mood for jokes. Watching Burne's long legs pedal his dorky bike away, disappearing past Alexander Hall, Amory knew he was in for a rough week.

Not that he doubted the war—Germany stood for everything repugnant to him; for materialism and the direction of tremendous licentious force; it was just that Burne’s face stayed in his memory and he was sick of the hysteria he was beginning to hear. “What on earth is the use of suddenly running down Goethe,” he declared to Alec and Tom	It wasn't that he questioned the war itself. He hated what Germany represented: a focus on money and unrestrained, brutal power. But he kept thinking about Burne's face, and he was getting tired of all the over-the-top emotions he was hearing. He said to Alec and Tom, "What's the point of suddenly criticizing Goethe?"

“Why write books to prove he started the war—or that that stupid, overestimated Schiller is a demon in disguise?” “Have you ever read anything of theirs?” asked Tom shrewdly. “No,” Amory admitted. “Neither have I,” he said laughing	"Why write books trying to show he caused the war, or that Schiller, who everyone thinks is so great, is actually evil?" "Have you even read their stuff?" Tom asked, thinking he was smart. "No," Amory said. "Me neither," he laughed.

“People will shout,” said Alec quietly, “but Goethe’s on his same old shelf in the library—to bore anyone that wants to read him!” Amory subsided, and the subject dropped. “What are you going to do, Amory?” “Infantry or aviation, I can’t make up my mind—I hate mechanics, but then of course aviation’s the thing for me—” “I feel as Amory does,” said Tom	"People will complain," Alec said softly, "but Goethe will still be there in the library, gathering dust – for anyone who wants to read him." Amory quieted down, and the conversation ended. "What are you planning to do, Amory?" "Join the army or become a pilot. I can't decide. I hate working with machines, but flying seems like the right thing for me." "I feel the same way as Amory," said Tom.

“Infantry or aviation—aviation sounds like the romantic side of the war, of course—like cavalry used to be, you know; but like Amory I don’t know a horsepower from a piston-rod.” Somehow Amory’s dissatisfaction with his lack of enthusiasm culminated in an attempt to put the blame for the whole war on the ancestors of his generation. all the people who cheered for Germany in 1870	"Infantry or flying? Flying seems like the cool part of the war, like the cavalry used to be. But, like Amory, I don’t know anything about engines. "Somehow, I'm unhappy that I'm not excited about this, and I'm trying to blame the war on our grandparents' generation—all the people who supported Germany back in 1870."

All the materialists rampant, all the idolizers of German science and efficiency. So he sat one day in an English lecture and heard “Locksley Hall” quoted and fell into a brown study with contempt for Tennyson and all he stood for—for he took him as a representative of the Victorians. “Victorians, Victorians, who never learned to weep Who sowed the bitter harvest that your children go to reap—” scribbled Amory in his notebook. The lecturer was saying something about Tennyson’s solidity and fifty heads were bent to take notes	He hated the people obsessed with money and those who worshipped German science and productivity. One day, he was in an English class and heard someone quoting "Locksley Hall." He started daydreaming, feeling disgusted with Tennyson and everything he represented. He saw Tennyson as the typical Victorian. Amory wrote in his notebook, "Victorians, Victorians, you never learned to feel. You created the problems that your kids will suffer from." The teacher was talking about how dependable Tennyson was, and everyone was busy writing it down.

Amory turned over to a fresh page and began scrawling again. “They shuddered when they found what Mr. Darwin was about, They shuddered when the waltz came in and Newman hurried out—” But the waltz came in much earlier; he crossed that out. “And entitled ‘A Song in the Time of Order,’ ” came the professor’s voice, droning far away	Amory flipped to a new page and started writing again. “People freaked out when they figured out what Darwin was doing. They freaked out when the waltz became popular and Newman left in a hurry—” But the waltz was popular way before that; he crossed it out. “And it’s called ‘A Song in the Time of Order,’ ” the professor said, his voice echoing from a distance.

“Time of Order”—Good Lord! Everything crammed in the box and the Victorians sitting on the lid smiling serenely. With Browning in his Italian villa crying bravely: “All’s for the best	"Old-fashioned Values"—Oh my God! Everything's stuck in the past, and those old Victorian ideas are holding it all down, acting like they know best. Like Browning in his fancy Italian house, trying to be brave and saying: "Everything happens for a reason."

Amory scribbled again. “You knelt up in the temple and he bent to hear you pray, You thanked him for your ‘glorious gains’—reproached him for ‘Cathay	Amory wrote more. "You kneeled in church, and he leaned down to listen to your prayer. You thanked him for all your 'amazing wins'—and blamed him for 'China.'"

’ ” Why could he never get more than a couplet at a time? Now he needed something to rhyme with: “You would keep Him straight with science, though He had gone wrong before.” Well, anyway. “You met your children in your home—‘I’ve fixed it up!’ you cried, Took your fifty years of Europe, and then virtuously—died	"Why could he only write two lines of poetry at once? Now he needed a rhyme for: 'You'd try to correct God with science, even though He messed up before.' Oh well. 'You greeted your kids at home—'I've made it better!' you said, Took all your time in Europe, and then died like you were a good person—'"

“That was to a great extent Tennyson’s idea,” came the lecturer’s voice. “Swinburne’s ‘Song in the Time of Order’ might well have been Tennyson’s title. He idealized order against chaos, against waste.” At last Amory had it	"That's basically Tennyson's point," the teacher said. "Swinburne's poem 'Song in the Time of Order' could easily have been a Tennyson title. He thought order was better than chaos and waste." Amory finally understood.

He turned over another page and scrawled vigorously for the twenty minutes that was left of the hour. Then he walked up to the desk and deposited a page torn out of his notebook. “Here’s a poem to the Victorians, sir,” he said coldly	He flipped the page and wrote like crazy for the last twenty minutes of class. Then he went to the teacher's desk and dropped off a page ripped from his notebook. "Here's a poem about the Victorian era," he said, sounding detached.

The professor picked it up curiously while Amory backed rapidly through the door. Here is what he had written: “Songs in the time of order You left for us to sing, Proofs with excluded middles, Answers to life in rhyme, Keys of the prison warder And ancient bells to ring, Time was the end of riddles, We were the end of time. Here were domestic oceans And a sky that we might reach, Guns and a guarded border, Gantlets—but not to fling, Thousands of old emotions And a platitude for each, Songs in the time of order —And tongues, that we might sing.”	The professor, interested, grabbed the paper as Amory quickly retreated. It said: "Songs for stable times, you left us to sing. Clear-cut proofs, rhyming answers to life's questions. Keys from a jailer, and old bells to chime. Time used to solve everything, we thought we were timeless. We had oceans at home, and a reachable sky. Guns, a protected border, challenges, but none to throw down. Thousands of familiar feelings, and clichés for each. Songs for stable times - and voices, so we could sing."

Early April slipped by in a haze—a haze of long evenings on the club veranda with the graphophone playing “Poor Butterfly” inside. for “Poor Butterfly” had been the song of that last year. The war seemed scarcely to touch them and it might have been one of the senior springs of the past, except for the drilling every other afternoon, yet Amory realized poignantly that this was the last spring under the old regime	Early April went by quickly in a blur. It was all about spending long evenings on the club porch, listening to "Poor Butterfly" on the record player inside. "Poor Butterfly" had been *the* song of the past year. The war didn't seem to affect them much. It could have been any spring from the past, except they had to do drills every other day. But Amory knew, deep down, that this was the last spring of the way things used to be.

“This is the great protest against the superman,” said Amory. “I suppose so,” Alec agreed. “He’s absolutely irreconcilable with any Utopia	"This is a big pushback against the idea of the 'superman'," Amory said. "Yeah, I guess," Alec agreed. "He just doesn't fit into any perfect world."

As long as he occurs, there’s trouble and all the latent evil that makes a crowd list and sway when he talks.” “And of course all that he is is a gifted man without a moral sense.” “That’s all. I think the worst thing to contemplate is this—it’s all happened before, how soon will it happen again? Fifty years after Waterloo Napoleon was as much a hero to English school children as Wellington	"As long as he's around, there's going to be problems and all the hidden bad stuff that makes people get worked up when he speaks." "And really, he's just a talented guy who doesn't care about right and wrong." "That's it. But the scariest thing is: this has all happened before. How long until it happens again? Fifty years after Napoleon lost at Waterloo, English kids thought he was as cool as Wellington.”

How do we know our grandchildren won’t idolize Von Hindenburg the same way?” “What brings it about?” “Time, damn it, and the historian. If we could only learn to look on evil as evil, whether it’s clothed in filth or monotony or magnificence.” “God! Haven’t we raked the universe over the coals for four years?” Then the night came that was to be the last	"How do we know our grandkids won't hero-worship Von Hindenburg too?" "What makes that happen?" "Time, that's what, and historians. We just need to see bad stuff as bad, no matter how disgusting, boring, or impressive it looks." "God, haven't we been through hell for the past four years?" Then the final night arrived.

Tom and Amory, bound in the morning for different training-camps, paced the shadowy walks as usual and seemed still to see around them the faces of the men they knew. “The grass is full of ghosts tonight.” “The whole campus is alive with them.” They paused by Little and watched the moon rise, to make silver of the slate roof of Dodd and blue the rustling trees	Tom and Amory, leaving for separate training camps in the morning, walked their familiar routes in the dark. They felt like they could still see the faces of everyone they knew. "It feels like there are ghosts everywhere tonight." "Yeah, the whole campus is haunted." They stopped near Little Hall and watched the moon come up, turning the roof of Dodd Hall silver and the trees blue in the moonlight.

“You know,” whispered Tom, “what we feel now is the sense of all the gorgeous youth that has rioted through here in two hundred years.” A last burst of singing flooded up from Blair Arch—broken voices for some long parting. “And what we leave here is more than this class; it’s the whole heritage of youth. We’re just one generation—we’re breaking all the links that seemed to bind us here to top-booted and high-stocked generations	"You know," Tom whispered, "what we're feeling now is like all the amazing young people who have gone wild here for the past two hundred years." A final wave of singing came from Blair Arch—rough voices singing goodbye. "And what we leave behind is more than just our class; it's everything that youth stands for. We're just one group, and we're breaking away from the things that used to connect us to those old-fashioned, stuffy generations.”

We’ve walked arm and arm with Burr and Light-Horse Harry Lee through half these deep-blue nights.” “That’s what they are,” Tom tangented off, “deep blue—a bit of color would spoil them, make them exotic. Spires, against a sky that’s a promise of dawn, and blue light on the slate roofs—it hurts. rather—” “Goodbye, Aaron Burr,” Amory called toward deserted Nassau Hall, “you and I knew strange corners of life	We’ve walked together, close like friends, with Burr and Light-Horse Harry Lee on so many of these dark nights.” Tom changed the subject, “That's what they are: dark. Any bright colors would ruin them, make them too fancy. The towers against the sky, which looks like dawn is coming, and the blue light on the roofs—it’s almost painful.” Amory called out towards the empty Nassau Hall, “Goodbye, Aaron Burr. You and I have seen some weird stuff.”

His voice echoed in the stillness. “The torches are out,” whispered Tom	His voice was loud in the quiet. "The lights are off," Tom murmured.

“Ah, Messalina, the long shadows are building minarets on the stadium—” For an instant the voices of freshman year surged around them and then they looked at each other with faint tears in their eyes. “Damn!” “Damn!” The last light fades and drifts across the land—the low, long land, the sunny land of spires; the ghosts of evening tune again their lyres and wander singing in a plaintive band down the long corridors of trees; pale fires echo the night from tower top to tower: Oh, sleep that dreams, and dream that never tires, press from the petals of the lotus flower something of this to keep, the essence of an hour. No more to wait the twilight of the moon in this sequestered vale of star and spire, for one eternal morning of desire passes to time and earthy afternoon. Here, Heraclitus, did you find in fire and shifting things the prophecy you hurled down the dead years; this midnight my desire will see, shadowed among the embers, furled in flame, the splendor and the sadness of the world	"Man, it's getting late, the shadows are getting long on the stadium." For a second, they remembered their first year, then they looked at each other, almost crying. "Damn!" "Damn!" The sun's going down, shining on the land—the flat land, the sunny land with all the towers; the night feels like the past, and sad songs fill the air among the trees; lights shine from the towers: Oh, sleep that dreams, and dream that never ends, hold onto something, anything, from this moment. We don't have to wait for night anymore in this hidden place, because our perfect, endless dream is fading into reality. Hey, Heraclitus, were you right about change and fire being everything? Tonight, I see the beauty and sadness of the world in the dying embers of this fire."

May, 1917–February, 1919 A letter dated January, 1918, written by Monsignor Darcy to Amory, who is a second lieutenant in the 171st Infantry, Port of Embarkation, Camp Mills, Long Island. My dear Boy: All you need tell me of yourself is that you still are; for the rest I merely search back in a restive memory, a thermometer that records only fevers, and match you with what I was at your age	May 1917 – February 1919. A letter from Monsignor Darcy to Amory, dated January 1918. Amory is now a second lieutenant with the 171st Infantry, waiting to ship out at Camp Mills, Long Island. My dear Boy: Just knowing you're still alive is enough for me. For everything else, I just have to rummage through my restless memories – memories that only seem to recall the exciting, difficult times – and compare you to the person I was when I was your age.

But men will chatter and you and I will still shout our futilities to each other across the stage until the last silly curtain falls plump! upon our bobbing heads. But you are starting the spluttering magic-lantern show of life with much the same array of slides as I had, so I need to write you if only to shriek the colossal stupidity of people. This is the end of one thing: for better or worse you will never again be quite the Amory Blaine that I knew, never again will we meet as we have met, because your generation is growing hard, much harder than mine ever grew, nourished as they were on the stuff of the nineties	People will keep talking, and we'll keep yelling our pointless thoughts at each other until it's all over. You're starting your life with pretty much the same stuff I had, so I have to tell you how incredibly stupid people are. This is the end of something. You'll never be the same Amory Blaine I knew, and we'll never connect like we used to because your generation is becoming tough, way tougher than mine, which grew up in the nineties.

Amory, lately I reread Aeschylus and there in the divine irony of the Agamemnon I find the only answer to this bitter age—all the world tumbled about our ears, and the closest parallel ages back in that hopeless resignation. There are times when I think of the men out there as Roman legionaries, miles from their corrupt city, stemming back the hordes. hordes a little more menacing, after all, than the corrupt city	Lately, I reread Aeschylus, and in the ironic story of Agamemnon, I think I found the only way to deal with this messed-up time. It feels like the world is collapsing around us, just like it did long ago when people felt hopeless. Sometimes, I see the soldiers out there as Roman soldiers, far away from their messed-up home, fighting off the invaders—invaders who are actually even scarier than their corrupt home.

another blind blow at the race, furies that we passed with ovations years ago, over whose corpses we bleated triumphantly all through the Victorian era. And afterward an out-and-out materialistic world—and the Catholic Church. I wonder where you’ll fit in	Another stupid attack on progress, old problems we celebrated overcoming years ago, things we bragged about defeating all through the Victorian period. And then, a totally materialistic world—plus the Catholic Church. I wonder where you'll belong.

Of one thing I’m sure—Celtic you’ll live and Celtic you’ll die; so if you don’t use heaven as a continual referendum for your ideas you’ll find earth a continual recall to your ambitions. Amory, I’ve discovered suddenly that I’m an old man. Like all old men, I’ve had dreams sometimes and I’m going to tell you of them. I’ve enjoyed imagining that you were my son, that perhaps when I was young I went into a state of coma and begat you, and when I came to, had no recollection of it	One thing's for sure: you'll always be a dreamer. So, if you don't constantly question your beliefs, life will keep knocking you down. Amory, I just realized I'm getting old. Like old people do, I've had dreams, and I'm going to tell you about them. I've liked pretending you were my son, like maybe I was young, spaced out, and had you, and then just forgot all about it.

it’s the paternal instinct, Amory—celibacy goes deeper than the flesh. Sometimes I think that the explanation of our deep resemblance is some common ancestor, and I find that the only blood that the Darcys and the O’Haras have in common is that of the O’Donahues. Stephen was his name, I think	It's like a fatherly feeling, Amory. Choosing not to have sex goes beyond just physical stuff. Sometimes I think the reason we're so alike is because we share some old relative way back. And I figure the only family connection the Darcys and O'Haras have is through someone named Stephen O'Donahue, I think.

When the lightning strikes one of us it strikes both: you had hardly arrived at the port of embarkation when I got my papers to start for Rome, and I am waiting every moment to be told where to take ship. Even before you get this letter I shall be on the ocean; then will come your turn	If something big happens to one of us, it happens to both. You barely got to where you're leaving from when I got my orders to go to Rome. I'm expecting any minute to hear where I need to get on a boat. I'll probably be on the water before you even read this. Then, it'll be your turn.

You went to war as a gentleman should, just as you went to school and college, because it was the thing to do. It’s better to leave the blustering and tremulo-heroism to the middle classes; they do it so much better. Do you remember that weekend last March when you brought Burne Holiday from Princeton to see me? What a magnificent boy he is! It gave me a frightful shock afterward when you wrote that he thought me splendid; how could he be so deceived? Splendid is the one thing that neither you nor I are	You went to war like a proper gentleman, the same way you went to school and college—because it was expected. It's best to leave all the loud, dramatic heroics to regular folks; they're much better at it. Remember that weekend last March when you brought Burne Holiday from Princeton to visit? He's such an impressive guy! It really shocked me later when you wrote that he thought I was great; how could he be so wrong? "Great" is definitely not something either of us are.

We are many other things—we’re extraordinary, we’re clever, we could be said, I suppose, to be brilliant. We can attract people, we can make atmosphere, we can almost lose our Celtic souls in Celtic subtleties, we can almost always have our own way; but splendid—rather not! I am going to Rome with a wonderful dossier and letters of introduction that cover every capital in Europe, and there will be “no small stir” when I get there. How I wish you were with me! This sounds like a rather cynical paragraph, not at all the sort of thing that a middle-aged clergyman should write to a youth about to depart for the war; the only excuse is that the middle-aged clergyman is talking to himself	We're a lot of things. We're special, we're smart, you could even say we're amazing. People like us, we can create a vibe, we get lost in complicated emotions, and we usually get what we want. But "splendid"? Nah. I'm going to Rome with a killer resume and letters that will open doors all over Europe. It's going to be a big deal when I arrive. I wish you were coming with me! This probably sounds pretty harsh, especially coming from an older priest writing to a young guy about to go to war. But I'm really just talking to myself.

There are deep things in us and you know what they are as well as I do. We have great faith, though yours at present is uncrystallized; we have a terrible honesty that all our sophistry cannot destroy and, above all, a childlike simplicity that keeps us from ever being really malicious. I have written a keen for you which follows. I am sorry your cheeks are not up to the description I have written of them, but you will smoke and read all night— At any rate here it is: A Lament for a Foster Son, and He Going to the War Against the King of Foreign	We all have deep feelings and thoughts, and you understand them just as well as I do. We really believe in things, even if you're not sure what you believe in yet. We're incredibly honest, and no amount of lying can change that. Most importantly, we're innocent like children, which stops us from ever truly being mean. I wrote a poem for you, which is below. Sorry your cheeks aren't as rosy as I described in it, but you'll stay up all night reading and smoking anyway. Here it is: A Lament for a Foster Son, and He Going to War Against the King of Foreign Lands.

“Ochone He is gone from me the son of my mind And he in his golden youth like Angus Oge Angus of the bright birds And his mind strong and subtle like the mind of Cuchulin on Muirtheme. Awirra sthrue His brow is as white as the milk of the cows of Maeve And his cheeks like the cherries of the tree And it bending down to Mary and she feeding the Son of God. Aveelia Vrone His hair is like the golden collar of the Kings at Tara And his eyes like the four gray seas of Erin. And they swept with the mists of rain	"Oh no, my beloved son is gone. He died young, like a beautiful hero from a story. He was smart and clever, like a legendary warrior. God, his skin was as white as milk, and his cheeks were red like cherries on a tree, like Mary feeding baby Jesus. Oh God, his hair was as golden as a king's crown, and his eyes were like the gray Irish sea. And they were always sad."

Mavrone go Gudyo He to be in the joyful and red battle Amongst the chieftains and they doing great deeds of valor His life to go from him It is the chords of my own soul would be loosed. A Vich Deelish My heart is in the heart of my son And my life is in his life surely A man can be twice young In the life of his sons only. Jia du Vaha Alanav May the Son of God be above him and beneath him, before him and behind him May the King of the elements cast a mist over the eyes of the King of Foreign, May the Queen of the Graces lead him by the hand the way he can go through the midst of his enemies and they not seeing him May Patrick of the Gael and Collumb of the Churches and the five thousand Saints of Erin be better than a shield to him And he go into the fight	Alas, that he should be in the exciting and bloody battle among the leaders, performing brave acts. If he were to die, it would break my heart. Oh, my darling. My heart is one with my son's, and his life is my life. A man can only feel young again through his sons. May God protect him from all sides. May magic conceal him from his enemies so they can't see him. May saints and protectors guide him through danger. May he be safe as he goes into battle.

Och Ochone.” Amory—Amory—I feel, somehow, that this is all; one or both of us is not going to last out this war. I’ve been trying to tell you how much this reincarnation of myself in you has meant in the last few years	Oh, God. Amory, I have a feeling this is it. One of us isn't going to make it through the war. I've been wanting to tell you how much seeing myself reborn in you has meant to me these past few years.

curiously alike we are. curiously unlike. Goodbye, dear boy, and God be with you. Thayer Darcy.	We're so similar, yet so different. Goodbye, my friend, and good luck. Thayer Darcy.

Amory moved forward on the deck until he found a stool under an electric light. He searched in his pocket for notebook and pencil and then began to write, slowly, laboriously: “We leave tonight	Amory walked to the front of the boat and found a seat under a light. He looked for a notebook and pen in his pocket, then started writing slowly and carefully: "We leave tonight..."

Silent, we filled the still, deserted street, A column of dim gray, And ghosts rose startled at the muffled beat Along the moonless way; The shadowy shipyards echoed to the feet That turned from night and day. And so we linger on the windless decks, See on the spectre shore Shades of a thousand days, poor gray-ribbed wrecks	Quietly, we walked down the empty, silent street, a dull gray line. Ghosts seemed to jump, surprised by our soft footsteps in the darkness. The dark shipyards echoed with the sounds of our feet, turning away from both night and day. And so we stay here on the calm decks, seeing on the ghostly shore the shadows of so many past days, sad, broken memories.

Oh, shall we then deplore Those futile years! See how the sea is white! The clouds have broken and the heavens burn To hollow highways, paved with gravelled light The churning of the waves about the stern Rises to one voluminous nocturne, We leave tonight.” A letter from Amory, headed “Brest, March 11th, 1919,” to Lieutenant T. P	Should we be sad about those wasted years? Look, the sea is bright white! The clouds are gone, and the sky is shining Like roads made of glowing light. The waves crashing behind the boat sound like one loud, dark song. We're leaving tonight." This was from a letter Amory wrote to Lieutenant T.P., dated March 11, 1919, from Brest.

D’Invilliers, Camp Gordon, Ga. Dear Baudelaire: We meet in Manhattan on the 30th of this very mo.; we then proceed to take a very sporty apartment, you and I and Alec, who is at me elbow as I write	D'Invilliers, Camp Gordon, Georgia. Hey Baudelaire: Let's meet in Manhattan on the 30th of this month. Then, we’ll get a cool apartment together, you, me, and Alec, who's right here next to me while I'm writing this.

I don’t know what I’m going to do but I have a vague dream of going into politics. Why is it that the pick of the young Englishmen from Oxford and Cambridge go into politics and in the U.S	I'm not sure what I'll do, but I'm thinking about going into politics. Why do all the best young guys from Oxford and Cambridge in England go into politics, but...?

A. we leave it to the muckers?—raised in the ward, educated in the assembly and sent to Congress, fat-paunched bundles of corruption, devoid of “both ideas and ideals” as the debaters used to say. Even forty years ago we had good men in politics, but we, we are brought up to pile up a million and “show what we are made of.” Sometimes I wish I’d been an Englishman; American life is so damned dumb and stupid and healthy	Do we leave things to the corrupt guys? Guys who grew up in the system, got their education in politics, and ended up in Congress – just greedy, fat politicians with no good ideas or morals, like people used to say. Even way back when, we had good politicians. But now, we’re taught to make a ton of money and "prove ourselves." Sometimes I wish I was British. American life is just so ridiculously ignorant, pointless, and obsessed with success.

Since poor Beatrice died I’ll probably have a little money, but very darn little. I can forgive mother almost everything except the fact that in a sudden burst of religiosity toward the end, she left half of what remained to be spent in stained-glass windows and seminary endowments	Now that Beatrice is dead, I'll probably get a little money, but not much at all. I can forgive my mother almost anything, except that right before she died, she suddenly got very religious and gave half of what she had left to churches for things like fancy windows and supporting religious schools.

Mr. Barton, my lawyer, writes me that my thousands are mostly in street railways and that the said Street R	My lawyer, Mr. Barton, says most of my money is tied up in streetcar companies, and those...

R.s are losing money because of the five-cent fares. Imagine a salary list that gives $350 a month to a man that can’t read and write!—yet I believe in it, even though I’ve seen what was once a sizable fortune melt away between speculation, extravagance, the democratic administration, and the income tax—modern, that’s me all over, Mabel	Railroads are losing money because tickets cost only five cents. Can you believe they pay someone who can't even read or write $350 a month! Still, I support the system, even though I've watched a lot of money disappear because of bad investments, spending too much, the government, and taxes. That's me - totally modern.

At any rate we’ll have really knockout rooms—you can get a job on some fashion magazine, and Alec can go into the Zinc Company or whatever it is that his people own—he’s looking over my shoulder and he says it’s a brass company, but I don’t think it matters much, do you? There’s probably as much corruption in zinc-made money as brass-made money. As for the well-known Amory, he would write immortal literature if he were sure enough about anything to risk telling anyone else about it	Anyway, we'll have awesome apartments. You could work for a fashion magazine, and Alec can join that zinc... or brass, whatever company his family owns. He's saying it's brass, but does it really matter? Money from zinc is probably just as dirty as money from brass. And Amory? He'd write amazing books if he were confident enough to actually share his ideas.

There is no more dangerous gift to posterity than a few cleverly turned platitudes. Tom, why don’t you become a Catholic? Of course to be a good one you’d have to give up those violent intrigues you used to tell me about, but you’d write better poetry if you were linked up to tall golden candlesticks and long, even chants, and even if the American priests are rather burgeois, as Beatrice used to say, still you need only go to the sporty churches, and I’ll introduce you to Monsignor Darcy who really is a wonder. Kerry’s death was a blow, so was Jesse’s to a certain extent	The most dangerous thing you can leave behind for future generations is a bunch of cleverly worded, empty phrases. Tom, why not become Catholic? Sure, you’d have to quit those crazy schemes you used to tell me about to be a good one. But being connected to beautiful churches with candles and singing would make you a better poet. Even if American priests are a bit too ordinary, like Beatrice would say, you can just go to the cool churches. I can introduce you to Monsignor Darcy, he's amazing. Kerry's death was a big shock, and Jesse's too, a little bit.

And I have a great curiosity to know what queer corner of the world has swallowed Burne. Do you suppose he’s in prison under some false name? I confess that the war instead of making me orthodox, which is the correct reaction, has made me a passionate agnostic	I'm really curious to know where Burne has disappeared to. Do you think he's in jail somewhere, using a fake name? I have to admit, the war didn't make me more religious like it should have. Instead, it made me a strong doubter.

The Catholic Church has had its wings clipped so often lately that its part was timidly negligible, and they haven’t any good writers any more. I’m sick of Chesterton	The Catholic Church isn't as powerful as it used to be, and they don't have any good authors anymore. I'm tired of Chesterton.

I’ve only discovered one soldier who passed through the much-advertised spiritual crisis, like this fellow, Donald Hankey, and the one I knew was already studying for the ministry, so he was ripe for it. I honestly think that’s all pretty much rot, though it seemed to give sentimental comfort to those at home; and may make fathers and mothers appreciate their children. This crisis-inspired religion is rather valueless and fleeting at best	I've only met one soldier who actually had that whole "spiritual awakening" thing everyone talks about, like Donald Hankey. But the guy I knew was already planning to be a priest, so he was kind of set up for it. Honestly, I think that stuff is mostly BS, even though it seemed to make people back home feel better and maybe made parents love their kids more. This kind of religion that comes from a crisis isn't worth much and doesn't last.

I think four men have discovered Paris to one that discovered God. But us—you and me and Alec—oh, we’ll get a Jap butler and dress for dinner and have wine on the table and lead a contemplative, emotionless life until we decide to use machine-guns with the property owners—or throw bombs with the Bolshevik. God! Tom, I hope something happens. I’m restless as the devil and have a horror of getting fat or falling in love and growing domestic	More people find Paris than find God, I think. But us—you, me, Alec—we'll probably end up rich with a Japanese butler, dressing up for dinner, drinking wine, and living calm, detached lives. Until we either shoot the rich people with machine guns or join the communists and throw bombs. God! Tom, I hope something exciting happens. I'm so restless and terrified of getting boring, getting fat, falling in love, and settling down.

The place at Lake Geneva is now for rent but when I land I’m going West to see Mr. Barton and get some details. Write me care of the Blackstone, Chicago	The house by Lake Geneva is available to rent now. When I get to the US, I’m heading out West to talk to Mr. Barton and find out more. Write to me at the Blackstone Hotel, Chicago.

S’ever, dear Boswell, Samuel Johnson.	Yours ever, like Samuel Johnson to his friend Boswell.

Amory wandered slowly up the avenue and thought of the night as inevitably his—the pageantry and carnival of rich dusk and dim streets. it seemed that he had closed the book of fading harmonies at last and stepped into the sensuous vibrant walks of life. Everywhere these countless lights, this promise of a night of streets and singing—he moved in a half-dream through the crowd as if expecting to meet Rosalind hurrying toward him with eager feet from every corner	Amory strolled up the street, feeling like the night was his. He imagined the exciting atmosphere of the rich, dark evening and the shadowy streets. It was like he'd finished a sad story and finally entered the real world, full of energy and feeling. The lights everywhere and the feeling that something was going to happen – a night of people and music – made him drift through the crowd, half-expecting Rosalind to appear, running towards him from every direction.

How the unforgettable faces of dusk would blend to her, the myriad footsteps, a thousand overtures, would blend to her footsteps; and there would be more drunkenness than wine in the softness of her eyes on his. Even his dreams now were faint violins drifting like summer sounds upon the summer air	She'd become part of the beautiful evenings, the countless people, all the attention, all the movement. And when she looked at him, her eyes would be intoxicating. Even his dreams were now like soft, gentle music floating in the summer air.

The room was in darkness except for the faint glow of Tom’s cigarette where he lounged by the open window. As the door shut behind him, Amory stood a moment with his back against it	The room was dark, except for the dim light from Tom's cigarette. He was leaning by the open window. After the door closed, Amory stood still for a moment with his back against it.

“Hello, Benvenuto Blaine. How went the advertising business today?” Amory sprawled on a couch. “I loathed it as usual!” The momentary vision of the bustling agency was displaced quickly by another picture. “My God! She’s wonderful!” Tom sighed	"Hey, Benvenuto Blaine. How was the advertising job today?" Amory relaxed on the couch. "I hated it, like always!" He quickly forgot about the busy ad agency and thought about something else. "Wow! She's amazing!" Tom sighed.

“I can’t tell you,” repeated Amory, “just how wonderful she is. I don’t want you to know. I don’t want anyone to know.” Another sigh came from the window—quite a resigned sigh	"I can't explain," Amory said again, "how amazing she is. I don't want you to understand. I don't want anyone to understand." Another sigh came from the window—a sigh that sounded like giving up.

“She’s life and hope and happiness, my whole world now.” He felt the quiver of a tear on his eyelid	"She's my life, my hope, and my happiness. She's everything to me now." He felt a tear welling up.

“Oh, golly, Tom!”	"Oh, man, Tom!"

“Sit like we do,” she whispered. He sat in the big chair and held out his arms so that she could nestle inside them	"Sit like this," she whispered. He sat in the big chair and held his arms open so she could snuggle up to him.

“I knew you’d come tonight,” she said softly, “like summer, just when I needed you most. darling	"I knew you'd be here tonight," she said quietly, "just like summer, arriving exactly when I needed you the most, baby."

darling.” His lips moved lazily over her face	"Sweetheart," he murmured, kissing her face softly.

“You taste so good,” he sighed. “How do you mean, lover?” “Oh, just sweet, just sweet.” he held her closer. “Amory,” she whispered, “when you’re ready for me I’ll marry you	"You taste amazing," he sighed. "What do you mean, 'lover'?" "Oh, just... sweet. Just sweet." He hugged her tighter. "Amory," she whispered, "when you're ready to settle down, I'll marry you."

“We won’t have much at first.” “Don’t!” she cried. “It hurts when you reproach yourself for what you can’t give me. I’ve got your precious self—and that’s enough for me	"We won't have a lot to start." "Stop!" she said. "It bothers me when you blame yourself for not being able to give me things. I have you, and that's all I need."

“Tell me.” “You know, don’t you? Oh, you know.” “Yes, but I want to hear you say it.” “I love you, Amory, with all my heart	"Tell me." "You already know, right? Oh, you know you do." "Yeah, but I want you to say it." "Amory, I love you with everything I have."

“Always, will you?” “All my life—Oh, Amory—” “What?” “I want to belong to you. I want your people to be my people. I want to have your babies	"Forever?" "My whole life. Oh, Amory..." "What is it?" "I want to be yours completely. I want to be part of your family. I want to have your kids."

“But I haven’t any people.” “Don’t laugh at me, Amory	"But I don't have any family." "Don't make fun of me, Amory."

Just kiss me.” “I’ll do what you want,” he said. “No, I’ll do what you want	Just kiss me." "I'll do anything you want," he said. "No, I'll do anything *you* want."

We’re you—not me. Oh, you’re so much a part, so much all of me.” He closed his eyes. “I’m so happy that I’m frightened	It's you – not me, who matters. You're such a big part of me, you're everything to me." He closed his eyes. "I'm so happy, it scares me.

Wouldn’t it be awful if this was—was the high point?.” She looked at him dreamily. “Beauty and love pass, I know. Oh, there’s sadness, too	"Wouldn't it suck if this was as good as it gets?" She gazed at him, lost in thought. "I know beauty and love don't last forever. And there's sadness, too."

I suppose all great happiness is a little sad. Beauty means the scent of roses and then the death of roses—” “Beauty means the agony of sacrifice and the end of agony.” “And, Amory, we’re beautiful, I know. I’m sure God loves us—” “He loves you	I guess real happiness always has some sadness in it. Beauty is like the smell of roses, but then the roses die." "Beauty is like the pain of giving something up, followed by the end of that pain." "And Amory, we're beautiful, I know it. I'm sure God loves us." "He loves you."

You’re his most precious possession.” “I’m not his, I’m yours	"You're what he values most." "I don't belong to him, I belong to you."

Amory, I belong to you. For the first time I regret all the other kisses; now I know how much a kiss can mean.” Then they would smoke and he would tell her about his day at the office—and where they might live. Sometimes, when he was particularly loquacious, she went to sleep in his arms, but he loved that Rosalind—all Rosalinds—as he had never in the world loved anyone else	Amory, I'm yours. I wish I hadn't kissed anyone else before, because now I get how important a kiss can be." Then they'd smoke, and he'd tell her about his work day and where they could live. Sometimes, when he talked a lot, she'd fall asleep in his arms, but he loved Rosalind—all girls like Rosalind—more than anyone ever.

Intangibly fleeting, unrememberable hours.	Hours that slipped by so quickly you barely noticed them and can't recall them now.

One day Amory and Howard Gillespie meeting by accident downtown took lunch together, and Amory heard a story that delighted him. Gillespie after several cocktails was in a talkative mood; he began by telling Amory that he was sure Rosalind was slightly eccentric	One day, Amory and Howard Gillespie bumped into each other downtown and had lunch. Amory was really happy to hear a story Gillespie told him. Gillespie had a few drinks and was chatty, so he started by telling Amory he thought Rosalind was a little weird.

He had gone with her on a swimming party up in Westchester County, and someone mentioned that Annette Kellerman had been there one day on a visit and had dived from the top of a rickety, thirty-foot summer house. Immediately Rosalind insisted that Howard should climb up with her to see what it looked like. A minute later, as he sat and dangled his feet on the edge, a form shot by him; Rosalind, her arms spread in a beautiful swan dive, had sailed through the air into the clear water. “Of course I had to go, after that—and I nearly killed myself	He went with her to a swimming party in Westchester. Someone said Annette Kellerman had once visited and dove from a shaky, thirty-foot-high building. Right away, Rosalind made Howard climb up there with her to check it out. A minute later, he was sitting with his legs hanging over the edge when Rosalind suddenly jumped past him, doing a perfect swan dive into the clear water. "After that, I obviously had to jump—and I almost died!"

I thought I was pretty good to even try it. Nobody else in the party tried it. Well, afterward Rosalind had the nerve to ask me why I stooped over when I dove. ‘It didn’t make it any easier,’ she said, ‘it just took all the courage out of it	I was proud of myself just for attempting it. No one else at the party even tried. Then, later, Rosalind actually had the audacity to ask why I bent over when I dove. She said, "It didn't help you at all, it just looked really uncool."

I ask you, what can a man do with a girl like that? Unnecessary, I call it.” Gillespie failed to understand why Amory was smiling delightedly all through lunch. He thought perhaps he was one of these hollow optimists	"Seriously, what do you even *do* with a girl like that? It's just extra drama, if you ask me." Gillespie couldn't figure out why Amory was smiling so much during lunch. He probably thought Amory was just one of those fake-happy people.

The Knickerbocker Bar, beamed upon by Maxfield Parrish’s jovial, colorful Old King Cole, was well crowded. Amory stopped in the entrance and looked at his wristwatch; he wanted particularly to know the time, for something in his mind that catalogued and classified liked to chip things off cleanly. Later it would satisfy him in a vague way to be able to think “that thing ended at exactly twenty minutes after eight on Thursday, June 10, 1919.” This was allowing for the walk from her house—a walk concerning which he had afterward not the faintest recollection	The Knickerbocker Bar, with Maxfield Parrish's bright and cheerful painting of Old King Cole, was packed. Amory paused at the entrance and checked his watch. He really wanted to know the exact time because he liked to have a clear ending to things. Later, it would vaguely please him to remember, "That ended at exactly 8:20 PM on Thursday, June 10, 1919." This took into account the walk from her house—a walk he couldn't remember at all afterwards.

He was in rather grotesque condition: two days of worry and nervousness, of sleepless nights, of untouched meals, culminating in the emotional crisis and Rosalind’s abrupt decision—the strain of it had drugged the foreground of his mind into a merciful coma. As he fumbled clumsily with the olives at the free-lunch table, a man approached and spoke to him, and the olives dropped from his nervous hands	He was a mess. Two days of stress, anxiety, no sleep, and no food, topped off by the emotional breakdown and Rosalind dumping him. It had all basically numbed him out. He was awkwardly trying to grab some olives at the free food counter when someone came up to him and started talking. He was so shaky that he dropped the olives.

“Well, Amory.” It was someone he had known at Princeton; he had no idea of the name. “Hello, old boy—” he heard himself saying	"Hey, Amory." It was someone he knew from Princeton; he couldn't remember the guy's name. "Hey, man—" he heard himself say.

“Name’s Jim Wilson—you’ve forgotten.” “Sure, you bet, Jim. I remember.” “Going to reunion?” “You know!” Simultaneously he realized that he was not going to reunion	"I'm Jim Wilson, you forgot." "No way, Jim! I remember." "Going to the reunion?" "Of course!" At the same time, he knew he wasn't going to the reunion.

“Get overseas?” Amory nodded, his eyes staring oddly. Stepping back to let someone pass, he knocked the dish of olives to a crash on the floor. “Too bad,” he muttered	"Going abroad?" Amory nodded, looking dazed. He stepped back to let someone through and accidentally knocked the olives onto the floor, making a loud noise. "Shoot," he said quietly.

“Have a drink?” Wilson, ponderously diplomatic, reached over and slapped him on the back. “You’ve had plenty, old boy.” Amory eyed him dumbly until Wilson grew embarrassed under the scrutiny. “Plenty, hell!” said Amory finally	"Want a drink?" Wilson, trying to be smooth, reached over and slapped him on the back. "You've had enough to drink, buddy." Amory just stared at him, and Wilson started to feel awkward. "Enough? Bullshit!" Amory finally said.

“I haven’t had a drink today.” Wilson looked incredulous. “Have a drink or not?” cried Amory rudely. Together they sought the bar	"I haven't had a drink all day." Wilson looked like he didn't believe him. "Are you gonna drink or not?" Amory snapped. They went to find the bar together.

“Rye high.” “I’ll just take a Bronx.” Wilson had another; Amory had several more. They decided to sit down	"Rye high." "I'll have a Bronx." Wilson got another one. Amory had a few more. They decided to sit.

At ten o’clock Wilson was displaced by Carling, class of ’15. Amory, his head spinning gorgeously, layer upon layer of soft satisfaction setting over the bruised spots of his spirit, was discoursing volubly on the war. “ ’S a mental was’e,” he insisted with owl-like wisdom. “Two years my life spent inalleshual vacuity	At ten, Carling, from the class of '15, took Wilson's place. Amory felt wonderfully dizzy, a deep sense of peace settling over his emotional wounds, and he talked a lot about the war. "It's a mental waste," he said, acting very wise. "Two years of my life spent being completely stupid."

Los’ idealism, got be physcal anmal,” he shook his fist expressively at Old King Cole, “got be Prussian ’bout ev’thing, women ’specially. Use’ be straight ’bout women college	"His kind of idealism – it has to be a physical thing," he shook his fist at the painting, "it has to be strict and controlling about everything, especially women. It used to be straightforward about women in college."

Now don’givadam.” He expressed his lack of principle by sweeping a seltzer bottle with a broad gesture to noisy extinction on the floor, but this did not interrupt his speech. “Seek pleasure where find it for tomorrow die	"I don't give a damn." He showed he didn't care about rules by smashing a seltzer bottle on the floor, but he kept talking. "Look for fun wherever you can find it, because we all die tomorrow."

’At’s philos’phy for me now on.” Carling yawned, but Amory, waxing brilliant, continued: “Use’ wonder ’bout things—people satisfied compromise, fif’y-fif’y att’tude on life. Now don’ wonder, don’ wonder—” He became so emphatic in impressing on Carling the fact that he didn’t wonder that he lost the thread of his discourse and concluded by announcing to the bar at large that he was a “physcal anmal.” “What are you celebrating, Amory?” Amory leaned forward confidentially	"That's my philosophy from now on." Carling yawned, but Amory, getting excited, kept talking: "You used to wonder about things - people okay with settling, taking a middle-of-the-road view of life. Now I don't wonder, don't wonder—" He got so intense about making Carling understand he wasn't wondering anymore that he forgot what he was saying and ended up telling everyone in the bar he was a "physical animal." "What are you celebrating, Amory?" Amory leaned in, like he was sharing a secret.

“Cel’brating blowmylife. Great moment blow my life	"Celebrating ruining my life. A big moment for ruining my life."

Can’t tell you ’bout it—” He heard Carling addressing a remark to the bartender: “Give him a bromo-seltzer.” Amory shook his head indignantly. “None that stuff!” “But listen, Amory, you’re making yourself sick. You’re white as a ghost	"I can't talk about it." Carling told the bartender, "Get him a Bromo-Seltzer." Amory shook his head, annoyed. "No way, not that stuff!" "But listen, Amory, you're going to get sick. You look like a ghost."

Amory considered the question. He tried to look at himself in the mirror but even by squinting up one eye could only see as far as the row of bottles behind the bar	Amory thought about it. He tried to see himself in the mirror, but even when he squinted, he could only see the bottles lined up behind the bar.

“Like som’n solid. We go get some—some salad	"Like something real. Let's go get some... like, salad."

He settled his coat with an attempt at nonchalance, but letting go of the bar was too much for him, and he slumped against a chair. “We’ll go over to Shanley’s,” suggested Carling, offering an elbow	He tried to act cool adjusting his coat, but he couldn't let go of the bar and ended up collapsing into a chair. "Let's go to Shanley's," Carling said, offering him his arm for support.

With this assistance Amory managed to get his legs in motion enough to propel him across Forty-second Street. Shanley’s was very dim. He was conscious that he was talking in a loud voice, very succinctly and convincingly, he thought, about a desire to crush people under his heel. He consumed three club sandwiches, devouring each as though it were no larger than a chocolate-drop	With the help of the drinks, Amory managed to walk across Forty-second Street. Shanley's restaurant was very dark. He realized he was talking loudly and, he believed, clearly and persuasively about wanting to dominate people. He ate three club sandwiches, wolfing them down like they were tiny chocolates.

Then Rosalind began popping into his mind again, and he found his lips forming her name over and over. Next he was sleepy, and he had a hazy, listless sense of people in dress suits, probably waiters, gathering around the table. He was in a room and Carling was saying something about a knot in his shoelace. “Nemmine,” he managed to articulate drowsily	Then Rosalind started coming back into his thoughts, and he kept repeating her name to himself. After that, he got sleepy, and he had a vague, tired feeling of people in fancy clothes, probably waiters, standing around the table. He was in a room, and Carling was saying something about a knot in his shoelace. "Never mind," he mumbled sleepily.

“Sleep in ’em.”	"Sleep in them."

He awoke laughing and his eyes lazily roamed his surroundings, evidently a bedroom and bath in a good hotel. His head was whirring and picture after picture was forming and blurring and melting before his eyes, but beyond the desire to laugh he had no entirely conscious reaction. He reached for the phone beside his bed. “Hello—what hotel is this—? “Knickerbocker? All right, send up two rye highballs—” He lay for a moment and wondered idly whether they’d send up a bottle or just two of those little glass containers	He woke up laughing and looked around the room. It was clearly a nice hotel bedroom with a bathroom. His head was spinning, and he saw a jumble of images flashing through his mind, but mostly he just felt like laughing. He picked up the phone by the bed. "Hello, what hotel is this? The Knickerbocker? Okay, send up two rye highballs." He paused, wondering if they'd send a whole bottle or just two small glasses.

Then, with an effort, he struggled out of bed and ambled into the bathroom. When he emerged, rubbing himself lazily with a towel, he found the bar boy with the drinks and had a sudden desire to kid him. On reflection he decided that this would be undignified, so he waved him away. As the new alcohol tumbled into his stomach and warmed him, the isolated pictures began slowly to form a cinema reel of the day before	He forced himself to get out of bed and wandered into the bathroom. After drying himself off with a towel, he saw the waiter with the drinks and felt like joking around. But he thought it would be silly, so he told him to leave. As the alcohol started to kick in and warm him up, the scattered memories of yesterday began to come together like a movie.

Again he saw Rosalind curled weeping among the pillows, again he felt her tears against his cheek. Her words began ringing in his ears: “Don’t ever forget me, Amory—don’t ever forget me—” “Hell!” he faltered aloud, and then he choked and collapsed on the bed in a shaken spasm of grief. After a minute he opened his eyes and regarded the ceiling. “Damned fool!” he exclaimed in disgust, and with a voluminous sigh rose and approached the bottle	He pictured Rosalind crying on the pillows, felt her tears on his face. Her words kept replaying in his head: "Amory, never forget me—never forget me—" "Damn it!" he blurted out, then broke down, collapsing on the bed, shaking with sadness. After a moment, he looked up at the ceiling. "Stupid idiot!" he said, disgusted, then sighed heavily, got up, and went to the bottle.

After another glass he gave way loosely to the luxury of tears. Purposely he called up into his mind little incidents of the vanished spring, phrased to himself emotions that would make him react even more strongly to sorrow. “We were so happy,” he intoned dramatically, “so very happy	He had another drink and let himself cry. He deliberately thought about small things from last spring that were gone, and told himself things that would make him feel even sadder. He said in a dramatic voice, "We were so happy, so very happy."

Then he gave way again and knelt beside the bed, his head half-buried in the pillow. “My own girl—my own—Oh—” He clinched his teeth so that the tears streamed in a flood from his eyes. “Oh	He broke down again and knelt by the bed, burying his face in the pillow. "My girl—mine—Oh..." He gritted his teeth, tears pouring down his face. "Oh."

my baby girl, all I had, all I wanted!. Oh, my girl, come back, come back! I need you	My baby girl, she was everything to me, all I ever wanted! Oh, my girl, please come back! I need you.

need you. we’re so pitiful. just misery we brought each other. She’ll be shut away from me	I need you. We're pathetic. We've only caused each other pain. She'll be kept away from me.

I can’t see her; I can’t be her friend. It’s got to be that way—it’s got to be—” And then again: “We’ve been so happy, so very happy.” He rose to his feet and threw himself on the bed in an ecstasy of sentiment, and then lay exhausted while he realized slowly that he had been very drunk the night before, and that his head was spinning again wildly. He laughed, rose, and crossed again to Lethe	"I can't be with her, I can't be her friend. It has to be like this, it just has to be." Then he repeated, "We were so happy, really happy." He stood up and dramatically threw himself onto the bed, overcome with emotion. Then, he lay there exhausted, slowly realizing he'd been super drunk last night, and now his head was spinning like crazy again. He laughed, got up, and went back over to Lethe.

At noon he ran into a crowd in the Biltmore bar, and the riot began again. He had a vague recollection afterward of discussing French poetry with a British officer who was introduced to him as “Captain Corn, of his Majesty’s Foot,” and he remembered attempting to recite Clair de Lune at luncheon; then he slept in a big, soft chair until almost five o’clock when another crowd found and woke him; there followed an alcoholic dressing of several temperaments for the ordeal of dinner. They selected theatre tickets at Tyson’s for a play that had a four-drink programme—a play with two monotonous voices, with turbid, gloomy scenes, and lighting effects that were hard to follow when his eyes behaved so amazingly. He imagined afterward that it must have been The Jest	Around lunchtime, he bumped into a bunch of people at the Biltmore bar, and the party started up again. He vaguely remembered talking about French poems with a British officer he was introduced to as "Captain Corn, from the army." He also remembered trying to recite "Clair de Lune" while eating lunch. Then he passed out in a comfy chair until almost 5 p.m., when another group found him and woke him up. After that, they all drank a lot to get ready for dinner. They picked out tickets at Tyson's for a play that needed about four drinks to get through—a play with boring voices, confusing dark scenes, and lighting that was hard to follow because his vision was blurry. He later figured it must have been "The Jest."

Then the Coconut Grove, where Amory slept again on a little balcony outside. Out in Shanley’s, Yonkers, he became almost logical, and by a careful control of the number of highballs he drank, grew quite lucid and garrulous. He found that the party consisted of five men, two of whom he knew slightly; he became righteous about paying his share of the expense and insisted in a loud voice on arranging everything then and there to the amusement of the tables around him. Someone mentioned that a famous cabaret star was at the next table, so Amory rose and, approaching gallantly, introduced himself	After that, they went to the Coconut Grove, where Amory slept on a small outdoor balcony again. Later, at Shanley's in Yonkers, he actually started making sense. By carefully limiting his drinks, he became clear-headed and talkative. He realized the group was made up of five guys, two he barely knew. He got really insistent about paying his part of the bill, loudly demanding they settle everything immediately, which entertained everyone nearby. Someone pointed out a well-known performer was at the next table, so Amory stood up, went over confidently, and introduced himself.

this involved him in an argument, first with her escort and then with the headwaiter—Amory’s attitude being a lofty and exaggerated courtesy. he consented, after being confronted with irrefutable logic, to being led back to his own table	This got him into a fight, first with her date and then with the headwaiter. Amory was acting overly polite and superior. He finally agreed to go back to his own table after they made it clear he was wrong.

“Decided to commit suicide,” he announced suddenly. “When? Next year?” “Now	"I've decided to kill myself," he said out of the blue. "When? Next year?" "Now."

Tomorrow morning. Going to take a room at the Commodore, get into a hot bath and open a vein	Tomorrow morning, I'm getting a room at the Commodore hotel, taking a hot bath, and killing myself.

“He’s getting morbid!” “You need another rye, old boy!” “We’ll all talk it over tomorrow.” But Amory was not to be dissuaded, from argument at least	"He's getting depressing!" "You need another drink!" "We'll figure it all out tomorrow." But Amory wasn't going to stop arguing, at least.

“Did you ever get that way?” he demanded confidentially fortaccio. “Sure!” “Often?” “My chronic state.” This provoked discussion	"You ever feel like that?" he asked, leaning in. "Yeah!" "A lot?" "Basically, always." This led to a conversation.

One man said that he got so depressed sometimes that he seriously considered it. Another agreed that there was nothing to live for. “Captain Corn,” who had somehow rejoined the party, said that in his opinion it was when one’s health was bad that one felt that way most. Amory’s suggestion was that they should each order a Bronx, mix broken glass in it, and drink it off	One guy said he got so down he thought about ending it. Another agreed there was nothing worth living for. "Captain Corn," who was back with them, said you felt that way most when you were sick. Amory suggested they each order a Bronx cocktail, add crushed glass, and drink it all down.

To his relief no one applauded the idea, so having finished his highball, he balanced his chin in his hand and his elbow on the table—a most delicate, scarcely noticeable sleeping position, he assured himself—and went into a deep stupor. He was awakened by a woman clinging to him, a pretty woman, with brown, disarranged hair and dark blue eyes	Luckily, no one liked the plan, so after finishing his drink, he rested his chin on his hand and his elbow on the table. He told himself he looked like he was just thinking, not sleeping. Then, he passed out completely. He woke up when a pretty woman with messy brown hair and dark blue eyes was holding onto him.

“Take me home!” she cried. “Hello!” said Amory, blinking. “I like you,” she announced tenderly	"Take me home!" she yelled. "Hey!" Amory said, blinking. "I like you," she said softly.

“I like you too.” He noticed that there was a noisy man in the background and that one of his party was arguing with him. “Fella I was with’s a damn fool,” confided the blue-eyed woman. “I hate him	"I like you too." He heard a loud guy in the background arguing with someone in his group. The blue-eyed woman leaned in and said, "The guy I'm with is a total idiot. I can't stand him."

I want to go home with you.” “You drunk?” queried Amory with intense wisdom. She nodded coyly	"I want to go home with you," she said. Amory, acting like he knew everything, asked, "Are you drunk?" She nodded shyly.

“Go home with him,” he advised gravely. “He brought you.” At this point the noisy man in the background broke away from his detainers and approached	"Go home with him," he said seriously. "He's the one who brought you here." Just then, the loud guy in the back got away from the people holding him back and came over.

“Say!” he said fiercely. “I brought this girl out here and you’re butting in!” Amory regarded him coldly, while the girl clung to him closer	"Hey!" he said, angry. "I brought this girl here, and you're interfering!" Amory looked at him with a cold stare, as the girl held onto him tighter.

“You let go that girl!” cried the noisy man. Amory tried to make his eyes threatening. “You go to hell!” he directed finally, and turned his attention to the girl. “Love first sight,” he suggested	"Leave her alone!" yelled the loud man. Amory tried to look menacing. "Get lost!" he finally said, turning to the girl. "Love at first sight," he guessed.

“I love you,” she breathed and nestled close to him. She did have beautiful eyes. Someone leaned over and spoke in Amory’s ear. “That’s just Margaret Diamond	"I love you," she whispered, snuggling up to him. Her eyes really were beautiful. Someone leaned in and said to Amory, "That's just Margaret Diamond."

She’s drunk and this fellow here brought her. Better let her go	She's drunk, and this guy brought her. Just let her go.

“Let him take care of her, then!” shouted Amory furiously. “I’m no W.Y worker, am I?—am I?” “Let her go!” “It’s her hanging on, damn it! Let her hang!” The crowd around the table thickened. For an instant a brawl threatened, but a sleek waiter bent back Margaret Diamond’s fingers until she released her hold on Amory, whereupon she slapped the waiter furiously in the face and flung her arms about her raging original escort. “Oh, Lord!” cried Amory. “Let’s go!” “Come on, the taxis are getting scarce!” “Check, waiter	"Fine, let him deal with her!" Amory yelled, really mad. "I'm not a charity worker, am I? Am I?" "Let her go!" "She's the one holding on, damn it! Let her! " The crowd around the table got bigger. It looked like a fight was about to start, but a smooth waiter bent Margaret Diamond's fingers back until she let go of Amory. Then she slapped the waiter hard in the face and threw her arms around the guy she came with, who was also furious. "Oh God!" Amory said. "Let's get out of here!" "Come on, it's getting hard to find cabs!" "Bill, waiter!"

“C’mon, Amory. Your romance is over	Let's go, Amory. It's over between you two.

Amory laughed. “You don’t know how true you spoke. No idea. ’At’s the whole trouble	Amory laughed. "You have no idea how right you are. Seriously. That's the entire problem."

Two mornings later he knocked at the president’s door at Bascome and Barlow’s advertising agency. “Come in!” Amory entered unsteadily. “Morning, Mr. Barlow.”	Two mornings after that, he knocked on the boss's door at Bascome and Barlow's ad agency. "Come in!" Amory went in, feeling shaky. "Morning, Mr. Barlow."

Barlow brought his glasses to the inspection and set his mouth slightly ajar that he might better listen. “Well, Mr. Blaine	Barlow wore his glasses to the check-up and opened his mouth a little so he could hear better. "Okay, Mr. Blaine..."

We haven’t seen you for several days.” “No,” said Amory	"Haven't seen you in a while." "Nope," Amory replied.

“I’m quitting.” “Well—well—this is—” “I don’t like it here	"I'm leaving." "Wow, this is..." "I don't like it here."

“I’m sorry. I thought our relations had been quite—ah—pleasant. You seemed to be a hard worker—a little inclined perhaps to write fancy copy—” “I just got tired of it,” interrupted Amory rudely	"Sorry. I thought we were getting along fine. You seemed like a good worker—maybe you tried a little too hard to write impressive stuff." "I just got sick of it," Amory cut in, sounding annoyed.

“It didn’t matter a damn to me whether Harebell’s flour was any better than anyone else’s. In fact, I never ate any of it.	I didn't give a damn if Harebell's flour was better than anyone else's. Actually, I never even ate the stuff.

So I got tired of telling people about it—oh, I know I’ve been drinking—” Mr. Barlow’s face steeled by several ingots of expression. “You asked for a position—” Amory waved him to silence. “And I think I was rottenly underpaid	I got tired of explaining it to everyone--yeah, I know I've been drinking. Mr. Barlow's face hardened, showing many emotions. "You wanted a job--" Amory cut him off. "And I think I was really underpaid."

Thirty-five dollars a week—less than a good carpenter.” “You had just started	"Thirty-five bucks a week—that's less than a decent carpenter makes." "You were just starting out, though."

You’d never worked before,” said Mr. Barlow coolly	"You've never had a job before," Mr. Barlow said, sounding calm.

“But it took about ten thousand dollars to educate me where I could write your darned stuff for you. Anyway, as far as length of service goes, you’ve got stenographers here you’ve paid fifteen a week for five years.” “I’m not going to argue with you, sir,” said Mr. Barlow rising	"It cost me a fortune, like ten grand, to get smart enough to write the crap you want. Besides, some of your stenographers have been here five years, and you're only paying them fifteen bucks a week." "I'm not arguing with you, sir," Mr. Barlow said, standing up.

“Neither am I. I just wanted to tell you I’m quitting	"Me neither. I just wanted to let you know I'm quitting."

They stood for a moment looking at each other impassively and then Amory turned and left the office.	They stared at each other for a second without showing any emotion. Then, Amory turned around and walked out of the office.

Four days after that he returned at last to the apartment. Tom was engaged on a book review for The New Democracy on the staff of which he was employed. They regarded each other for a moment in silence. “Well?” “Well?” “Good Lord, Amory, where’d you get the black eye—and the jaw?” Amory laughed	Four days later, he finally came back to the apartment. Tom was working on a book review for *The New Democracy*, where he had a job. They looked at each other silently for a second. "So?" "So?" "Jesus, Amory, where did you get that black eye—and your jaw?" Amory laughed.

“That’s a mere nothing.” He peeled off his coat and bared his shoulders. “Look here!” Tom emitted a low whistle	"That's nothing." He took off his coat, showing his shoulders. "Check this out!" Tom whistled softly.

“What hit you?” Amory laughed again. “Oh, a lot of people. I got beaten up. Fact	"What happened to you?" Amory laughed again. "Oh, a bunch of people. I got into a fight. Seriously."

He slowly replaced his shirt. “It was bound to come sooner or later and I wouldn’t have missed it for anything	He put his shirt back on slowly. "It was going to happen eventually, and I'm glad I experienced it."

“Who was it?” “Well, there were some waiters and a couple of sailors and a few stray pedestrians, I guess. It’s the strangest feeling. You ought to get beaten up just for the experience of it. You fall down after a while and everybody sort of slashes in at you before you hit the ground—then they kick you	"Who did it?" "Oh, just some waiters, a couple of sailors, and some random people walking by, I think. It's a weird feeling. You should get beat up just to see what it's like. You fall down eventually, and everyone starts hitting you before you even land—then they kick you."

Tom lighted a cigarette. “I spent a day chasing you all over town, Amory	Tom lit a cigarette. "I wasted a whole day looking for you everywhere, Amory."

But you always kept a little ahead of me. I’d say you’ve been on some party.” Amory tumbled into a chair and asked for a cigarette	You were always a step ahead. I'd guess you've been out partying." Amory flopped into a chair and asked for a cigarette.

“You sober now?” asked Tom quizzically. “Pretty sober. Why?” “Well, Alec has left. His family had been after him to go home and live, so he—” A spasm of pain shook Amory	"Are you sober now?" Tom asked, looking at him funny. "Yeah, pretty sober. Why?" "Well, Alec's gone. His family kept bugging him to come home and live there, so he—" Amory suddenly felt a sharp pain.

“Too bad.” “Yes, it is too bad. We’ll have to get someone else if we’re going to stay here. The rent’s going up	"That sucks." "Yeah, it really sucks. We need to find another roommate if we want to keep living here. The rent's going up."

“Sure. Get anybody. I’ll leave it to you, Tom.” Amory walked into his bedroom	"Okay, get whoever you want. I trust you, Tom." Amory went into his bedroom.

The first thing that met his glance was a photograph of Rosalind that he had intended to have framed, propped up against a mirror on his dresser. He looked at it unmoved	The first thing he saw was a photo of Rosalind he was going to frame, leaning against a mirror on his dresser. He looked at it without feeling anything.

After the vivid mental pictures of her that were his portion at present, the portrait was curiously unreal. He went back into the study. “Got a cardboard box?” “No,” answered Tom, puzzled. “Why should I have? Oh, yes—there may be one in Alec’s room	The mental images of her he had now were so clear, the actual portrait felt strange and fake. He went back to the study. "Got a cardboard box?" "No," Tom replied, confused. "Why would I? Oh, wait—there might be one in Alec's room."

Eventually Amory found what he was looking for and, returning to his dresser, opened a drawer full of letters, notes, part of a chain, two little handkerchiefs, and some snapshots. As he transferred them carefully to the box his mind wandered to some place in a book where the hero, after preserving for a year a cake of his lost love’s soap, finally washed his hands with it. He laughed and began to hum “After you’ve gone”. ceased abruptly	Finally, Amory found it. He went back to his dresser, opened a drawer full of letters, notes, part of a necklace, two small handkerchiefs, and some photos. As he gently moved them to the box, he thought of a book he once read where the main character saved a bar of soap from his ex for a year, and then finally used it to wash his hands. He chuckled and started humming “After you’ve gone," but then suddenly stopped.

The string broke twice, and then he managed to secure it, dropped the package into the bottom of his trunk, and having slammed the lid returned to the study. “Going out?” Tom’s voice held an undertone of anxiety. “Uh-huh.” “Where?” “Couldn’t say, old keed	The string broke a couple of times, but he finally tied it tight. He put the package in his trunk, slammed the lid shut, and went back to the study. "Going out?" Tom asked, sounding worried. "Yeah." "Where to?" "Can't tell you, buddy."

“Let’s have dinner together.” “Sorry. I told Sukey Brett I’d eat with him	"Let's grab dinner." "Sorry, I already told Sukey Brett I'd eat with him."

Amory crossed the street and had a highball; then he walked to Washington Square and found a top seat on a bus. He disembarked at Forty-third Street and strolled to the Biltmore bar. “Hi, Amory!” “What’ll you have?” “Yo-ho! Waiter!”	Amory went across the street for a drink. Then he walked to Washington Square and got a good seat on a bus. He got off at Forty-third Street and walked to the bar at the Biltmore Hotel. "Hey, Amory!" "What are you drinking?" "Hey! Waiter!"

The advent of prohibition with the “thirsty-first” put a sudden stop to the submerging of Amory’s sorrows, and when he awoke one morning to find that the old bar-to-bar days were over, he had neither remorse for the past three weeks nor regret that their repetition was impossible. He had taken the most violent, if the weakest, method to shield himself from the stabs of memory, and while it was not a course he would have prescribed for others, he found in the end that it had done its business: he was over the first flush of pain. Don’t misunderstand! Amory had loved Rosalind as he would never love another living person. She had taken the first flush of his youth and brought from his unplumbed depths tenderness that had surprised him, gentleness and unselfishness that he had never given to another creature	When Prohibition started, stopping the flow of alcohol, Amory couldn't drown his sorrows anymore. He woke up one day and realized that going from bar to bar was a thing of the past. He didn't feel bad about the last few weeks of drinking, or sad that he couldn't do it again. He'd chosen the most extreme (though not the strongest) way to protect himself from painful memories. He wouldn't recommend it to others, but it worked for him: he was past the worst of the pain. And make no mistake, Amory loved Rosalind more than he'd ever love anyone else. She experienced his early youth, and brought out depths of tenderness, gentleness, and selflessness he never knew he had.

He had later love-affairs, but of a different sort: in those he went back to that, perhaps, more typical frame of mind, in which the girl became the mirror of a mood in him. Rosalind had drawn out what was more than passionate admiration; he had a deep, undying affection for Rosalind. But there had been, near the end, so much dramatic tragedy, culminating in the arabesque nightmare of his three weeks’ spree, that he was emotionally worn out. The people and surroundings that he remembered as being cool or delicately artificial, seemed to promise him a refuge	Later, he had other romances, but they were different. He went back to seeing the girl as just a reflection of his own feelings. With Rosalind, it was more than just lust; he genuinely loved her. But the end was so full of drama and tragedy, especially the crazy three weeks he went on a bender, that he was emotionally drained. He wanted to be around people and places that felt calm and a bit fake, because they seemed like a safe escape.

He wrote a cynical story which featured his father’s funeral and despatched it to a magazine, receiving in return a check for sixty dollars and a request for more of the same tone. This tickled his vanity, but inspired him to no further effort. He read enormously. He was puzzled and depressed by A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man; intensely interested by Joan and Peter and The Undying Fire, and rather surprised by his discovery through a critic named Mencken of several excellent American novels: Vandover and the Brute, The Damnation of Theron Ware, and Jennie Gerhardt	He wrote a sarcastic story about his dad's funeral and sent it to a magazine. They paid him sixty bucks and asked for more stories like it. He was flattered, but didn't write anything else. He read a lot. He was confused and bummed out by "A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man," but really into "Joan and Peter" and "The Undying Fire." He was also surprised to find some great American novels, like "Vandover and the Brute," "The Damnation of Theron Ware," and "Jennie Gerhardt," after a critic named Mencken told him about them.

Mackenzie, Chesterton, Galsworthy, Bennett, had sunk in his appreciation from sagacious, life-saturated geniuses to merely diverting contemporaries. Shaw’s aloof clarity and brilliant consistency and the gloriously intoxicated efforts of H	He used to think writers like Mackenzie, Chesterton, Galsworthy, and Bennett were wise, insightful geniuses who understood life deeply. Now, he just sees them as entertaining writers from his own time. Shaw's detached, clear thinking and consistent quality, along with H

G. Wells to fit the key of romantic symmetry into the elusive lock of truth, alone won his rapt attention. He wanted to see Monsignor Darcy, to whom he had written when he landed, but he had not heard from him; besides he knew that a visit to Monsignor would entail the story of Rosalind, and the thought of repeating it turned him cold with horror.	Only H.G. Wells, trying to make reality fit a romantic ideal, really grabbed his interest. He wanted to see Monsignor Darcy, who he’d written to when he arrived, but he hadn’t heard back. Also, he knew seeing the Monsignor would mean talking about Rosalind, and the thought of going over that again filled him with dread.

In his search for cool people he remembered Mrs. Lawrence, a very intelligent, very dignified lady, a convert to the church, and a great devotee of Monsignor’s. He called her on the phone one day	He was trying to find interesting people to hang out with and remembered Mrs. Lawrence. She was really smart, proper, and had converted to Catholicism. She was also a big fan of the Monsignor. So, he called her up.

Yes, she remembered him perfectly; no, Monsignor wasn’t in town, was in Boston she thought; he’d promised to come to dinner when he returned. Couldn’t Amory take luncheon with her? “I thought I’d better catch up, Mrs. Lawrence,” he said rather ambiguously when he arrived. “Monsignor was here just last week,” said Mrs. Lawrence regretfully. “He was very anxious to see you, but he’d left your address at home	Yes, she remembered him well. No, the Monsignor wasn't in town; she thought he was in Boston. He said he'd have dinner with her when he got back. Could Amory have lunch with her instead? "I wanted to see how you were," he said vaguely when he arrived. "The Monsignor was just here last week," Mrs. Lawrence said, sounding disappointed. "He really wanted to see you, but he forgot your address."

“Did he think I’d plunged into Bolshevism?” asked Amory, interested. “Oh, he’s having a frightful time.” “Why?” “About the Irish Republic	"Did he think I became a communist?" Amory asked, curious. "Oh, he's really stressed out." "Why?" "Because of the Irish Republic."

He thinks it lacks dignity.” “So?” “He went to Boston when the Irish President arrived and he was greatly distressed because the receiving committee, when they rode in an automobile, would put their arms around the President.” “I don’t blame him	He thinks it's undignified." "So what?" "He went to Boston when the Irish President got there and was really upset because the people welcoming him put their arms around the President in the car." "I see his point."

“Well, what impressed you more than anything while you were in the army? You look a great deal older.” “That’s from another, more disastrous battle,” he answered, smiling in spite of himself	"So, what was the biggest thing that struck you about being in the army? You seem way older." "Yeah, that's from a worse fight," he replied, smiling even though he didn't want to.

“But the army—let me see—well, I discovered that physical courage depends to a great extent on the physical shape a man is in. I found that I was as brave as the next man—it used to worry me before.” “What else?” “Well, the idea that men can stand anything if they get used to it, and the fact that I got a high mark in the psychological examination	"The army, huh? I figured out that how brave you are is mostly about being in good shape. Turns out I'm as brave as anyone else, which I used to stress about. What else did I learn? People can get used to pretty much anything. Oh, and I aced the psych test."

Mrs. Lawrence laughed. Amory was finding it a great relief to be in this cool house on Riverside Drive, away from more condensed New York and the sense of people expelling great quantities of breath into a little space. Mrs. Lawrence reminded him vaguely of Beatrice, not in temperament, but in her perfect grace and dignity.	Mrs. Lawrence chuckled. Amory felt much better being in this nice, cool house on Riverside Drive. It was a welcome change from crowded New York, where you felt like everyone was breathing down your neck in a tiny room. Mrs. Lawrence slightly reminded him of Beatrice, not because of her personality, but because she was so elegant and poised.

The house, its furnishings, the manner in which dinner was served, were in immense contrast to what he had met in the great places on Long Island, where the servants were so obtrusive that they had positively to be bumped out of the way, or even in the houses of more conservative “Union Club” families	This house, the furniture, and how dinner was done were super different from the fancy Long Island parties he'd been to. There, the servants were so in-your-face you practically had to shove them out of the way. It was even different from the more traditional, old-money families.

He wondered if this air of symmetrical restraint, this grace, which he felt was continental, was distilled through Mrs. Lawrence’s New England ancestry or acquired in long residence in Italy and Spain. Two glasses of sauterne at luncheon loosened his tongue, and he talked, with what he felt was something of his old charm, of religion and literature and the menacing phenomena of the social order. Mrs. Lawrence was ostensibly pleased with him, and her interest was especially in his mind;	He wondered if Mrs. Lawrence's controlled and elegant style, which seemed European, came from her New England family history or from living in Italy and Spain for so long. After a couple of glasses of wine at lunch, he felt more relaxed and talked, feeling like his old charming self, about religion, books, and the problems in society. Mrs. Lawrence seemed happy with him, and he was especially interested in what she thought of him.

he wanted people to like his mind again—after a while it might be such a nice place in which to live. “Monsignor Darcy still thinks that you’re his reincarnation, that your faith will eventually clarify.” “Perhaps,” he assented	He wanted people to respect his intelligence again. He thought that if that happened, his own mind would be a much better place to be. "Monsignor Darcy still believes you're his past life, and that your faith will eventually become clear," someone said. "Maybe," he agreed.

“I’m rather pagan at present. It’s just that religion doesn’t seem to have the slightest bearing on life at my age.” When he left her house he walked down Riverside Drive with a feeling of satisfaction. It was amusing to discuss again such subjects as this young poet, Stephen Vincent Benet, or the Irish Republic	"Right now, I'm not really religious. It just feels like religion doesn't matter at all to me at my age." Leaving her place, he felt good as he walked down Riverside Drive. He enjoyed talking again about things like that young poet, Stephen Vincent Benet, or the idea of an Irish Republic.

Between the rancid accusations of Edward Carson and Justice Cohalan he had completely tired of the Irish question; yet there had been a time when his own Celtic traits were pillars of his personal philosophy. There seemed suddenly to be much left in life, if only this revival of old interests did not mean that he was backing away from it again—backing away from life itself.	He got really sick of hearing Edward Carson and Justice Cohalan trash-talk Ireland. He used to be super proud of his Irish heritage and based his whole outlook on it. Now, it feels like there's a lot of stuff he could still do with his life, but he's worried that getting back into old interests means he's just trying to hide from reality and life itself.

“I’m tres old and tres bored, Tom,” said Amory one day, stretching himself at ease in the comfortable window-seat. He always felt most natural in a recumbent position. “You used to be entertaining before you started to write,” he continued	"I'm really old and really bored, Tom," Amory said one day, relaxing in the comfy window seat. He always felt most comfortable lying down. "You used to be fun before you started writing," he went on.

“Now you save any idea that you think would do to print.” Existence had settled back to an ambitionless normality	"Now, write down any ideas you think are good enough to publish." Life had gone back to being normal, without any big goals.

They had decided that with economy they could still afford the apartment, which Tom, with the domesticity of an elderly cat, had grown fond of. The old English hunting prints on the wall were Tom’s, and the large tapestry by courtesy, a relic of decadent days in college, and the great profusion of orphaned candlesticks and the carved Louis XV chair in which no one could sit more than a minute without acute spinal disorders—Tom claimed that this was because one was sitting in the lap of Montespan’s wraith—at any rate, it was Tom’s furniture that decided them to stay. They went out very little: to an occasional play, or to dinner at the Ritz or the Princeton Club. With prohibition the great rendezvous had received their death wounds; no longer could one wander to the Biltmore bar at twelve or five and find congenial spirits, and both Tom and Amory had outgrown the passion for dancing with midwestern or New Jersey debbies at the Club-de-Vingt (surnamed the “Club de Gink”) or the Plaza Rose Room—besides even that required several cocktails “to come down to the intellectual level of the women present,” as Amory had once put it to a horrified matron	Even though they were trying to save money, they figured they could still keep the apartment. Tom really liked it; he was attached to it like an old cat. The hunting pictures on the wall were his. The big tapestry was a leftover from his wild college days. And all those random candlesticks and the fancy chair that was too uncomfortable to sit in for more than a minute—Tom said it was because you were sitting on the ghost of Montespan. Basically, it was Tom's furniture that made them want to stay. They didn’t go out much, maybe to a play or dinner at the Ritz or the Princeton Club. Because of Prohibition, the popular meeting places weren’t what they used to be. You couldn't just go to the Biltmore bar and find people you liked hanging out. Plus, Tom and Amory were over going to dances with girls from the Midwest or New Jersey at those clubs—especially since, as Amory once told a shocked older woman, you needed a few drinks "to dumb yourself down enough to talk to them."

Amory had lately received several alarming letters from Mr. Barton—the Lake Geneva house was too large to be easily rented; the best rent obtainable at present would serve this year to little more than pay for the taxes and necessary improvements; in fact, the lawyer suggested that the whole property was simply a white elephant on Amory’s hands. Nevertheless, even though it might not yield a cent for the next three years, Amory decided with a vague sentimentality that for the present, at any rate, he would not sell the house	Recently, Amory got some bad news from his lawyer, Mr. Barton. The house by Lake Geneva was too big to rent easily. The most he could get this year would barely cover the taxes and repairs. The lawyer basically said the house was a burden. Even though it might not make any money for three years, Amory decided, somewhat emotionally, that he wouldn't sell it, at least not right now.

This particular day on which he announced his ennui to Tom had been quite typical. He had risen at noon, lunched with Mrs. Lawrence, and then ridden abstractedly homeward atop one of his beloved buses	The day he told Tom he was bored was pretty normal for him. He woke up at noon, had lunch with Mrs. Lawrence, and then took one of his favorite buses home, lost in thought.

“Why shouldn’t you be bored,” yawned Tom. “Isn’t that the conventional frame of mind for the young man of your age and condition?” “Yes,” said Amory speculatively, “but I’m more than bored; I am restless.” “Love and war did for you.” “Well,” Amory considered, “I’m not sure that the war itself had any great effect on either you or me—but it certainly ruined the old backgrounds, sort of killed individualism out of our generation	"Why wouldn't you be bored?" Tom yawned. "Isn't that how guys our age are *supposed* to feel?" "Yeah," Amory said, thinking about it, "but I'm more than bored, I'm just... restless." "Love and the war messed you up." "Well," Amory said, considering it, "I don't know if the war itself really changed you or me that much. But it definitely destroyed the way things used to be. It kind of killed any sense of being an individual for our generation."

Tom looked up in surprise. “Yes it did,” insisted Amory. “I’m not sure it didn’t kill it out of the whole world	Tom looked up, surprised. "Yeah, it did," Amory insisted. "I almost think it destroyed it for everyone."

Oh, Lord, what a pleasure it used to be to dream I might be a really great dictator or writer or religious or political leader—and now even a Leonardo da Vinci or Lorenzo de Medici couldn’t be a real old-fashioned bolt in the world. Life is too huge and complex. The world is so overgrown that it can’t lift its own fingers, and I was planning to be such an important finger—” “I don’t agree with you,” Tom interrupted	Man, it was so fun to imagine I could be an amazing dictator, writer, religious figure, or political leader. Now, even a genius like Leonardo da Vinci or a powerful guy like Lorenzo de Medici couldn't shake things up in the old way. Life's too complicated. The world's so massive and messy it's paralyzed, and I was hoping to be a big shot influencing it all!" "I don't see it that way," Tom cut in.

“There never were men placed in such egotistic positions since—oh, since the French Revolution.” Amory disagreed violently	"Nobody's been as self-centered as these guys since, like, the French Revolution." Amory totally disagreed.

“You’re mistaking this period when every nut is an individualist for a period of individualism. Wilson has only been powerful when he has represented; he’s had to compromise over and over again. Just as soon as Trotsky and Lenin take a definite, consistent stand they’ll become merely two-minute figures like Kerensky. Even Foch hasn’t half the significance of Stonewall Jackson	"You're confusing this time when everyone *thinks* they're unique with a time when people *actually are* unique. Wilson was only strong when he spoke for the majority; he had to give in constantly. As soon as Trotsky and Lenin take a firm position, they'll become unimportant like Kerensky. Even Foch isn't as important as Stonewall Jackson."

War used to be the most individualistic pursuit of man, and yet the popular heroes of the war had neither authority nor responsibility: Guynemer and Sergeant York. How could a schoolboy make a hero of Pershing? A big man has no time really to do anything but just sit and be big.” “Then you don’t think there will be any more permanent world heroes?” “Yes—in history—not in life. Carlyle would have difficulty getting material for a new chapter on The Hero as a Big Man	"War used to be about what one person could do. But the famous war heroes now, like Guynemer and Sergeant York, didn't have real power or leadership roles. How could a kid admire someone like Pershing? A powerful person is too busy being important to actually *do* anything." "So, you don't think there will be any lasting global heroes?" "Yes, but only in history books, not in real life. Someone like Carlyle [who wrote about heroes] would have a hard time finding material for a chapter on a hero who is just a powerful leader."

“Go on. I’m a good listener today	Keep talking. I'm really listening today.

“People try so hard to believe in leaders now, pitifully hard. But we no sooner get a popular reformer or politician or soldier or writer or philosopher—a Roosevelt, a Tolstoy, a Wood, a Shaw, a Nietzsche, than the crosscurrents of criticism wash him away. My Lord, no man can stand prominence these days. It’s the surest path to obscurity	"People really want to believe in leaders these days, almost desperately. But as soon as someone becomes popular – a reformer, a politician, a soldier, a writer, a philosopher, anyone like Roosevelt, Tolstoy, Wood, Shaw, or Nietzsche – they immediately get attacked and criticized from all sides. Honestly, no one can stay famous for long anymore. Being well-known is the fastest way to be forgotten."

People get sick of hearing the same name over and over.” “Then you blame it on the press?” “Absolutely	"People get tired of hearing the same name all the time." "So, you blame the media?" "Definitely."

Look at you; you’re on The New Democracy, considered the most brilliant weekly in the country, read by the men who do things and all that. What’s your business? Why, to be as clever, as interesting, and as brilliantly cynical as possible about every man, doctrine, book, or policy that is assigned you to deal with. The more strong lights, the more spiritual scandal you can throw on the matter, the more money they pay you, the more the people buy the issue	Check you out! You work for "The New Democracy," which everyone thinks is the smartest magazine around. Important people read it. So, what's your job? Basically, to be super clever, interesting, and totally cynical about anything they tell you to write about – people, ideas, books, whatever. The more shocking and controversial you can make things sound, the more they pay you, and the more magazines they sell.

You, Tom d’Invilliers, a blighted Shelley, changing, shifting, clever, unscrupulous, represent the critical consciousness of the race—Oh, don’t protest, I know the stuff. I used to write book reviews in college; I considered it rare sport to refer to the latest honest, conscientious effort to propound a theory or a remedy as a ‘welcome addition to our light summer reading.’ Come on now, admit it	You, Tom d'Invilliers, a messed-up Shelley, always changing, smart, and willing to do anything, you're like the voice of reason for everyone. Seriously, don't argue, I know what I'm talking about. I used to write book reviews in college, and I thought it was funny to call some serious, thoughtful book a "light summer read." Come on, admit it.

Tom laughed, and Amory continued triumphantly. “We want to believe. Young students try to believe in older authors, constituents try to believe in their Congressmen, countries try to believe in their statesmen, but they can’t	Tom laughed, and Amory went on, feeling like he'd won. "We all want to have faith. Young people want to believe in famous writers, voters want to believe their politicians, countries want to believe in their leaders, but they just can't."

Too many voices, too much scattered, illogical, ill-considered criticism. It’s worse in the case of newspapers	Too many opinions and too much random, thoughtless complaining. Newspapers are even worse.

Any rich, unprogressive old party with that particularly grasping, acquisitive form of mentality known as financial genius can own a paper that is the intellectual meat and drink of thousands of tired, hurried men, men too involved in the business of modern living to swallow anything but predigested food. For two cents the voter buys his politics, prejudices, and philosophy	A wealthy, out-of-touch old guy with a super greedy, money-obsessed mind can own a newspaper that's the main source of information for tons of busy, stressed-out people. These people are too caught up in daily life to think for themselves. They just want easy answers. For almost nothing, a voter buys what to think, who to hate, and how to see the world.

A year later there is a new political ring or a change in the paper’s ownership, consequence: more confusion, more contradiction, a sudden inrush of new ideas, their tempering, their distillation, the reaction against them—” He paused only to get his breath. “And that is why I have sworn not to put pen to paper until my ideas either clarify or depart entirely; I have quite enough sins on my soul without putting dangerous, shallow epigrams into people’s heads; I might cause a poor, inoffensive capitalist to have a vulgar liaison with a bomb, or get some innocent little Bolshevik tangled up with a machine-gun bullet—” Tom was growing restless under this lampooning of his connection with The New Democracy. “What’s all this got to do with your being bored?” Amory considered that it had much to do with it. “How’ll I fit in?” he demanded	A year later, there's new political drama, or the newspaper gets a new owner. The result? More confusion, more mixed messages, a flood of new ideas, then people calming down about them, sorting them out, and finally, pushing back against them." He paused to breathe. "That's why I've promised myself not to write anything until my thoughts become clear, or completely disappear. I already have enough to feel guilty about without putting silly, dangerous sayings into people's minds. I might make some harmless rich guy get blown up by a bomb, or get some sweet, innocent communist killed by a machine gun." Tom, getting annoyed by the mocking of his work at "The New Democracy," asked, "What does this have to do with you being bored?" Amory thought it had a lot to do with it. "How will I ever fit in?" he asked.

“What am I for? To propagate the race? According to the American novels we are led to believe that the ‘healthy American boy’ from nineteen to twenty-five is an entirely sexless animal. As a matter of fact, the healthier he is the less that’s true	What's my purpose? Just to have kids? American books make it seem like a typical American guy from nineteen to twenty-five doesn't care about sex at all. But honestly, the healthier he is, the less likely that's true.

The only alternative to letting it get you is some violent interest. Well, the war is over; I believe too much in the responsibilities of authorship to write just now; and business, well, business speaks for itself	The only way to avoid being overwhelmed is to get really passionate about something. But the war's done. I take writing too seriously to just dash something off right now. And as for business? Well, you know how business is.

It has no connection with anything in the world that I’ve ever been interested in, except a slim, utilitarian connection with economics. What I’d see of it, lost in a clerkship, for the next and best ten years of my life would have the intellectual content of an industrial movie	It’s totally unrelated to anything I care about, except maybe that it involves making money. Spending the best ten years of my life stuck in a boring office job would be as intellectually stimulating as watching a corporate training video.

“Try fiction,” suggested Tom. “Trouble is I get distracted when I start to write stories—get afraid I’m doing it instead of living—get thinking maybe life is waiting for me in the Japanese gardens at the Ritz or at Atlantic City or on the lower East Side. “Anyway,” he continued, “I haven’t the vital urge	"Try writing stories," Tom said. "The problem is, when I start, I get sidetracked. I get worried that I'm writing instead of actually living my life. I start thinking that real life is happening somewhere else, like at some fancy hotel garden, or a party town, or even a poor neighborhood." He went on, "Anyway, I don't have the strong desire to write that you need."

I wanted to be a regular human being but the girl couldn’t see it that way.” “You’ll find another.” “God! Banish the thought. Why don’t you tell me that ‘if the girl had been worth having she’d have waited for you’? No, sir, the girl really worth having won’t wait for anybody	I just wanted to be normal, but she didn't see it. "You'll find someone else." "God, no! Don't even say that. Why don't you just tell me that 'if she was really into me, she would have waited'? No way. The girl who's truly awesome isn't going to wait for anyone."

If I thought there’d be another I’d lose my remaining faith in human nature. Maybe I’ll play—but Rosalind was the only girl in the wide world that could have held me.” “Well,” yawned Tom, “I’ve played confidant a good hour by the clock	If I believed I could fall in love again, I'd lose all hope for people. Maybe I'll mess around, but Rosalind was the only girl I could have truly committed to.” “Okay," Tom yawned, "I’ve been listening to you for a whole hour now.”

Still, I’m glad to see you’re beginning to have violent views again on something.” “I am,” agreed Amory reluctantly	"But, I'm happy you're getting passionate about something again." "Yeah, I guess so," Amory said, not really enthusiastic.

“Yet when I see a happy family it makes me sick at my stomach—” “Happy families try to make people feel that way,” said Tom cynically.	"But seeing a happy family makes me want to throw up." "Happy families try to make everyone else feel bad," Tom said, sounding bitter.

There were days when Amory listened. These were when Tom, wreathed in smoke, indulged in the slaughter of American literature. Words failed him. “Fifty thousand dollars a year,” he would cry	Sometimes Amory actually paid attention. This happened when Tom, surrounded by cigarette smoke, went on a rant about how terrible American books were. He couldn't find the right words, but he would complain, "Fifty grand a year!"

“My God! Look at them, look at them—Edna Ferber, Gouverneur Morris, Fanny Hurst, Mary Roberts Rinehart—not producing among ’em one story or novel that will last ten years. This man Cobb—I don’t think he’s either clever or amusing—and what’s more, I don’t think very many people do, except the editors. He’s just groggy with advertising	"Wow! Check them out—Edna Ferber, Gouverneur Morris, Fanny Hurst, Mary Roberts Rinehart—and none of them are writing anything that anyone will care about in ten years. And that guy Cobb? I don't think he's smart or funny. Actually, I don't think many people do, except maybe the editors. He's just drunk on advertising."

And—oh Harold Bell Wright oh Zane Grey—” “They try.” “No, they don’t even try	"Ugh, Harold Bell Wright, Zane Grey..." "They make an effort, I guess." "No, they don't even bother trying."

Some of them can write, but they won’t sit down and do one honest novel. Most of them can’t write, I’ll admit. I believe Rupert Hughes tries to give a real, comprehensive picture of American life, but his style and perspective are barbarous	Some people can write well, but they don't bother to write a truly truthful novel. I'll admit, most can't write well anyway. I think Rupert Hughes tries to show a realistic view of American life, but his writing style and how he sees things are awful.

Ernest Poole and Dorothy Canfield try but they’re hindered by their absolute lack of any sense of humor; but at least they crowd their work instead of spreading it thin. Every author ought to write every book as if he were going to be beheaded the day he finished it.” “Is that double entente?” “Don’t slow me up! Now there’s a few of ’em that seem to have some cultural background, some intelligence and a good deal of literary felicity but they just simply won’t write honestly; they’d all claim there was no public for good stuff	"Ernest Poole and Dorothy Canfield try, but they're held back because they aren't funny at all. At least they put a lot into their work instead of stretching it out. Every writer should write every book like they're going to be executed the day they finish!" "Is that a joke?" "Don't interrupt! Now, some writers seem smart, well-read, and can write well, but they just won't be honest. They'd all say that there's no audience for quality writing."

Then why the devil is it that Wells, Conrad, Galsworthy, Shaw, Bennett, and the rest depend on America for over half their sales?” “How does little Tommy like the poets?” Tom was overcome. He dropped his arms until they swung loosely beside the chair and emitted faint grunts. “I’m writing a satire on ’em now, calling it Boston Bards and Hearst Reviewers	"Then why the heck do writers like Wells, Conrad, Galsworthy, Shaw, Bennett, and the others sell more than half their books in America?" "So, what do you think of poetry?" Tom was stunned. His arms fell to his sides, and he just made these little noises. "I'm writing a funny piece about them now, called 'Boston Poets and Hearst Critics.'"

“Let’s hear it,” said Amory eagerly. “I’ve only got the last few lines done	"Read it!" Amory said, excited. "I've only finished the last few lines."

“That’s very modern. Let’s hear ’em, if they’re funny.” Tom produced a folded paper from his pocket and read aloud, pausing at intervals so that Amory could see that it was free verse: “So Walter Arensberg, Alfred Kreymborg, Carl Sandburg, Louis Untermeyer, Eunice Tietjens, Clara Shanafelt, James Oppenheim, Maxwell Bodenheim, Richard Glaenzer, Scharmel Iris, Conrad Aiken, I place your names here So that you may live If only as names, Sinuous, mauve-colored names, In the Juvenalia Of my collected editions.” Amory roared	"Cool, read them if they're actually funny." Tom pulled a folded paper from his pocket and read it out loud, pausing to show Amory it was "free verse": "Walter Arensberg, Alfred Kreymborg, Carl Sandburg, Louis Untermeyer, Eunice Tietjens, Clara Shanafelt, James Oppenheim, Maxwell Bodenheim, Richard Glaenzer, Scharmel Iris, Conrad Aiken, I'm putting your names here so you can live on, even if just as names – curvy, purplish names – in the early stuff of my future collected works." Amory burst out laughing.

“You win the iron pansy. I’ll buy you a meal on the arrogance of the last two lines.” Amory did not entirely agree with Tom’s sweeping damnation of American novelists and poets. He enjoyed both Vachel Lindsay and Booth Tarkington, and admired the conscientious, if slender, artistry of Edgar Lee Masters	"Okay, you get the prize for being the most cynical. I'll treat you to a meal because those last two lines were so cocky." Amory didn't completely agree with Tom's harsh judgment of American writers. He liked Vachel Lindsay and Booth Tarkington, and he respected Edgar Lee Masters' careful, even if limited, writing.

“What I hate is this idiotic drivel about ‘I am God—I am man—I ride the winds—I look through the smoke—I am the life sense.’ ” “It’s ghastly!” “And I wish American novelists would give up trying to make business romantically interesting. Nobody wants to read about it, unless it’s crooked business. If it was an entertaining subject they’d buy the life of James J	"I can't stand this stupid nonsense about people thinking they're all-powerful and connected to everything." "It's awful!" "And I wish American novelists would stop trying to make business sound exciting. Nobody wants to read about it, unless it's about shady deals. If business stories were actually interesting, people would buy biographies of successful businessmen."

Hill and not one of these long office tragedies that harp along on the significance of smoke—” “And gloom,” said Tom. “That’s another favorite, though I’ll admit the Russians have the monopoly. Our specialty is stories about little girls who break their spines and get adopted by grouchy old men because they smile so much	Hill keeps writing these super depressing office stories about how important something stupid like cigarette smoke is." "And all that sadness," Tom added. "That's another thing he loves, but the Russians are the masters of that. Hill's thing is writing about little girls who get hurt and then adopted by grumpy old guys because they're always smiling.

You’d think we were a race of cheerful cripples and that the common end of the Russian peasant was suicide—” “Six o’clock,” said Amory, glancing at his wristwatch. “I’ll buy you a grea’ big dinner on the strength of the Juvenalia of your collected editions.”	It's like you expect us all to be happy losers, and that every Russian farmer ends up killing himself." "Six o'clock," Amory said, looking at his watch. "I'll treat you to a huge dinner because of the terrible student writing in your published books."

July sweltered out with a last hot week, and Amory in another surge of unrest realized that it was just five months since he and Rosalind had met. Yet it was already hard for him to visualize the heart-whole boy who had stepped off the transport, passionately desiring the adventure of life. One night while the heat, overpowering and enervating, poured into the windows of his room he struggled for several hours in a vague effort to immortalize the poignancy of that time	July ended with a final, really hot week, and Amory, feeling restless again, realized it had only been five months since he met Rosalind. But it was already hard for him to picture himself as the carefree guy who'd just gotten off the boat, excited for life's adventures. One night, the heat was heavy and draining, filling his room, and he spent hours trying to capture the intense feelings he had back then in writing.

The February streets, wind-washed by night, blow full of strange half-intermittent damps, bearing on wasted walks in shining sight wet snow plashed into gleams under the lamps, like golden oil from some divine machine, in an hour of thaw and stars. Strange damps—full of the eyes of many men, crowded with life borne in upon a lull. Oh, I was young, for I could turn again to you, most finite and most beautiful, and taste the stuff of half-remembered dreams, sweet and new on your mouth	The February streets, cleaned by the wind last night, have weird, patchy dampness in the air. You can see wet snow reflecting the streetlights as you walk. It looks like golden oil from some perfect machine, now that it's starting to melt and the stars are out. This strange dampness feels like it's full of people's thoughts and the energy of life returning after a quiet time. I was young then, because I could still come back to you, so real and so beautiful, and rediscover the feelings of dreams I almost forgot, fresh and sweet on your lips.

There was a tanging in the midnight air—silence was dead and sound not yet awoken—Life cracked like ice!—one brilliant note and there, radiant and pale, you stood. and spring had broken. (The icicles were short upon the roofs and the changeling city swooned	The air vibrated at midnight. It wasn't silent, but no other sounds had started yet. Life suddenly changed, like ice breaking. One clear note rang out, and there you were, glowing but pale. Spring had finally arrived. (The icicles on the roofs were small, and the strange city felt faint.)

Our thoughts were frosty mist along the eaves; our two ghosts kissed, high on the long, mazed wires—eerie half-laughter echoes here and leaves only a fatuous sigh for young desires; regret has followed after things she loved, leaving the great husk.	Our thoughts were like frozen breath hanging in the air; our spirits met briefly, up on the confusing telephone lines. Strange, faint laughter lingers here, leaving only a silly sigh for youthful wants. Regret has come after the things she cared about, leaving only emptiness behind.

In mid-August came a letter from Monsignor Darcy, who had evidently just stumbled on his address: My dear Boy: Your last letter was quite enough to make me worry about you. It was not a bit like yourself. Reading between the lines I should imagine that your engagement to this girl is making you rather unhappy, and I see you have lost all the feeling of romance that you had before the war	In mid-August, Monsignor Darcy wrote, having finally found him: "My dear Boy, your last letter really worried me. It didn't sound like you at all. Reading between the lines, I think being engaged to this girl is making you miserable. And it seems you've lost all the romantic feelings you had before the war."

You make a great mistake if you think you can be romantic without religion. Sometimes I think that with both of us the secret of success, when we find it, is the mystical element in us: something flows into us that enlarges our personalities, and when it ebbs out our personalities shrink; I should call your last two letters rather shrivelled	You're wrong if you think you can be romantic without some kind of faith. I think that when we figure out how to be successful, it'll be because we both have this spiritual side. Something will inspire us and make us bigger people. But when that inspiration fades, we'll shrink back. Honestly, your last two letters were pretty uninspired.

Beware of losing yourself in the personality of another being, man or woman. His Eminence Cardinal O’Neill and the Bishop of Boston are staying with me at present, so it is hard for me to get a moment to write, but I wish you would come up here later if only for a weekend. I go to Washington this week	Don't get lost in someone else's personality, whether it's a man or a woman. Cardinal O'Neill and the Bishop of Boston are visiting right now, so it's hard to find time to write. I wish you could come up here later, even if it's just for a weekend. I'm going to Washington this week.

What I shall do in the future is hanging in the balance. Absolutely between ourselves I should not be surprised to see the red hat of a cardinal descend upon my unworthy head within the next eight months. In any event, I should like to have a house in New York or Washington where you could drop in for weekends	My future's up in the air. Just between you and me, I wouldn't be shocked if I became a cardinal in the next few months. Anyway, I want a house in New York or Washington so you can visit on weekends.

Amory, I’m very glad we’re both alive; this war could easily have been the end of a brilliant family. But in regard to matrimony, you are now at the most dangerous period of your life. You might marry in haste and repent at leisure, but I think you won’t	Amory, I'm really happy we both made it through this war; it could have wiped out our family. As for getting married, you're at a risky age. You could rush into it and regret it later, but I don't think you will.

From what you write me about the present calamitous state of your finances, what you want is naturally impossible. However, if I judge you by the means I usually choose, I should say that there will be something of an emotional crisis within the next year. Do write me	Based on what you've written about your money problems, what you're asking for is out of the question. But, knowing you like I think I do, I'd guess you're headed for some kind of emotional breakdown in the next year. Keep in touch.

I feel annoyingly out of date on you. With greatest affection, Thayer Darcy	I feel like I don't know you anymore, and it's frustrating. Love, Thayer Darcy.

Within a week after the receipt of this letter their little household fell precipitously to pieces. The immediate cause was the serious and probably chronic illness of Tom’s mother	About a week after they got the letter, their home life completely fell apart. This happened because Tom's mother got seriously and likely permanently sick.

So they stored the furniture, gave instructions to sublet and shook hands gloomily in the Pennsylvania Station. Amory and Tom seemed always to be saying goodbye	They put their furniture in storage, told someone to rent out their place, and sadly shook hands at Penn Station. Amory and Tom were always saying goodbye to each other.

Feeling very much alone, Amory yielded to an impulse and set off southward, intending to join Monsignor in Washington. They missed connections by two hours, and, deciding to spend a few days with an ancient, remembered uncle, Amory journeyed up through the luxuriant fields of Maryland into Ramilly County	Feeling super lonely, Amory just decided to head south and try to meet up with Monsignor in Washington. They missed each other by a couple of hours, so he figured he'd hang out with a really old uncle he remembered for a few days. Amory traveled north through Maryland's beautiful countryside into Ramilly County.

But instead of two days his stay lasted from mid-August nearly through September, for in Maryland he met Eleanor.	Instead of staying for two days, he stayed from mid-August almost until the end of September because he met Eleanor in Maryland.

For years afterward when Amory thought of Eleanor he seemed still to hear the wind sobbing around him and sending little chills into the places beside his heart. The night when they rode up the slope and watched the cold moon float through the clouds, he lost a further part of him that nothing could restore; and when he lost it he lost also the power of regretting it. Eleanor was, say, the last time that evil crept close to Amory under the mask of beauty, the last weird mystery that held him with wild fascination and pounded his soul to flakes	Later on, whenever Amory remembered Eleanor, he always felt a sadness like the wind crying around him, making him feel empty inside. That night they rode up the hill and watched the moon moving through the clouds, he lost something important that he could never get back. And when he lost it, he also stopped being able to feel sorry about it. Eleanor was maybe the last time something bad got close to Amory disguised as something beautiful, the last strange and mysterious thing that fascinated him and completely overwhelmed him.

With her his imagination ran riot and that is why they rode to the highest hill and watched an evil moon ride high, for they knew then that they could see the devil in each other. But Eleanor—did Amory dream her? Afterward their ghosts played, yet both of them hoped from their souls never to meet. Was it the infinite sadness of her eyes that drew him or the mirror of himself that he found in the gorgeous clarity of her mind? She will have no other adventure like Amory, and if she reads this she will say: “And Amory will have no other adventure like me	He went wild thinking about her, so they went to the highest hill to watch the scary moon, because they felt they could see the worst parts of themselves in each other. But was Eleanor even real, or just a fantasy? Later, they were haunted by the memory of their relationship, but deep down, they never wanted to see each other again. Was he drawn to her sad eyes, or to the way she reflected his own personality with her brilliant mind? She'll never have another relationship like the one she had with Amory, and if she reads this, she'll think: "And Amory will never have another relationship like the one he had with me."

Nor will she sigh, any more than he would sigh. Eleanor tried to put it on paper once: “The fading things we only know We’ll have forgotten. Put away	She won't be sad, just like he won't be sad. Eleanor once tried to write about it: "The memories we barely remember, we'll eventually forget. Put them away."

Desires that melted with the snow, And dreams begotten This today: The sudden dawns we laughed to greet, That all could see, that none could share, Will be but dawns. and if we meet We shall not care	Those desires that vanished quickly, and the dreams we created today: The sunrises we used to laugh at together, that everyone could see, but nobody else understood, will just be sunrises. And if we run into each other, we won't even care.

Dear. not one tear will rise for this. A little while hence No regret Will stir for a remembered kiss— Not even silence, When we’ve met, Will give old ghosts a waste to roam, Or stir the surface of the sea. If gray shapes drift beneath the foam We shall not see	Honey, don't worry, I won't cry about this. Pretty soon, I won't even regret that kiss we shared. When we see each other, there won't even be an awkward silence. Our past won't haunt us or cause any trouble. If sad memories are still there, hidden deep down, we won't notice them.

They quarrelled dangerously because Amory maintained that sea and see couldn’t possibly be used as a rhyme. And then Eleanor had part of another verse that she couldn’t find a beginning for: “But wisdom passes	They argued fiercely because Amory insisted "sea" and "see" don't actually rhyme. Then Eleanor had a bit of another poem she was working on, but she couldn't figure out how to start it: "But wisdom passes..."

still the years Will feed us wisdom. Age will go Back to the old—For all our tears We shall not know	We'll get wiser as we get older. Growing old just makes us like we used to be. Even though we're sad now, we won't understand everything anyway.

Eleanor hated Maryland passionately. She belonged to the oldest of the old families of Ramilly County and lived in a big, gloomy house with her grandfather	Eleanor really hated Maryland. She came from a super old, established family in Ramilly County and lived with her grandfather in a large, depressing house.

She had been born and brought up in France. I see I am starting wrong. Let me begin again. Amory was bored, as he usually was in the country	She grew up in France. Wait, that's not the right way to start the story. Let me try again. Amory was bored, like he usually was when he was in the country.

He used to go for far walks by himself—and wander along reciting “Ulalume” to the cornfields, and congratulating Poe for drinking himself to death in that atmosphere of smiling complacency. One afternoon he had strolled for several miles along a road that was new to him, and then through a wood on bad advice from a colored woman	He'd often take long, solitary walks, reciting "Ulalume" to the cornfields and praising Poe for drinking himself to death in such a self-satisfied place. Once, he walked several miles down a road he'd never seen before, then into a forest because a Black woman gave him bad directions.

losing himself entirely. A passing storm decided to break out, and to his great impatience the sky grew black as pitch and the rain began to splatter down through the trees, become suddenly furtive and ghostly. Thunder rolled with menacing crashes up the valley and scattered through the woods in intermittent batteries	He got completely lost in thought. Just then, a storm suddenly started. He was annoyed when the sky turned completely black and rain began to fall hard through the trees, making them look shadowy and mysterious. Thunder echoed loudly and threateningly up the valley and through the woods, like bursts of gunfire.

He stumbled blindly on, hunting for a way out, and finally, through webs of twisted branches, caught sight of a rift in the trees where the unbroken lightning showed open country. He rushed to the edge of the woods and then hesitated whether or not to cross the fields and try to reach the shelter of the little house marked by a light far down the valley. It was only half past five, but he could see scarcely ten steps before him, except when the lightning made everything vivid and grotesque for great sweeps around	He kept walking without seeing much, trying to find a way out. Finally, through tangled branches, he saw an opening in the trees where the lightning showed clear land. He ran to the edge of the woods but stopped, unsure if he should cross the fields to reach the small house with a light far down in the valley. It was only 5:30, but he could barely see ten steps ahead, except when the lightning flashed and made everything look bright and strange.

Suddenly a strange sound fell on his ears. It was a song, in a low, husky voice, a girl’s voice, and whoever was singing was very close to him. A year before he might have laughed, or trembled; but in his restless mood he only stood and listened while the words sank into his consciousness: “Les sanglots longs Des violons De l’automne Blessent mon cœur D’une langueur Monotone	He suddenly heard something weird. It was a song, sung quietly in a rough voice, a girl's voice. She was singing very near him. A year ago, he might have laughed or been nervous. But now, feeling restless, he just stood there, listening as the words slowly registered in his mind: “The long sobs of autumn violins wound my heart with a monotonous languor.”

The lightning split the sky, but the song went on without a quaver. The girl was evidently in the field and the voice seemed to come vaguely from a haystack about twenty feet in front of him	Lightning flashed across the sky, but the singing didn't stop, not even for a moment. The girl was clearly out there, and the voice sounded like it was coming from a haystack about twenty feet ahead.

Then it ceased: ceased and began again in a weird chant that soared and hung and fell and blended with the rain: “Tout suffocant Et blême quand Sonne l’heure Je me souviens Des jours anciens Et je pleure.” “Who the devil is there in Ramilly County,” muttered Amory aloud, “who would deliver Verlaine in an extemporaneous tune to a soaking haystack?” “Somebody’s there!” cried the voice unalarmed	Then it stopped. It stopped and started again with a strange, drawn-out song that went up high, stayed there, then came down and mixed with the rain: "Tout suffocant Et blême quand Sonne l’heure Je me souviens Des jours anciens Et je pleure.” Amory said to himself, "Who in the world would be singing Verlaine in a made-up tune to a wet haystack in Ramilly County?" "Someone's there!" the voice replied, not worried.

“Who are you?—Manfred, St. Christopher, or Queen Victoria?” “I’m Don Juan!” Amory shouted on impulse, raising his voice above the noise of the rain and the wind	"Who do you think you are? Some tragic hero, a saint, or a powerful ruler?" "I'm Don Juan!" Amory yelled suddenly, making himself heard over the storm.

A delighted shriek came from the haystack. “I know who you are—you’re the blond boy that likes ‘Ulalume’—I recognize your voice.” “How do I get up?” he cried from the foot of the haystack, whither he had arrived, dripping wet	A happy yell came from inside the haystack. "I know who you are! You're the blond guy who likes 'Ulalume'! I know your voice." He was soaking wet at the bottom of the haystack and called out, "How do I climb up?"

A head appeared over the edge—it was so dark that Amory could just make out a patch of damp hair and two eyes that gleamed like a cat’s. “Run back!” came the voice, “and jump and I’ll catch your hand—no, not there—on the other side	A head popped up. It was so dark Amory could barely see wet hair and two eyes shining like a cat's. A voice said, "Go back! Run and jump, and I'll grab your hand. No, not there, over here!"

He followed directions and as he sprawled up the side, knee-deep in hay, a small, white hand reached out, gripped his, and helped him onto the top. “Here you are, Juan,” cried she of the damp hair	Following the instructions, he climbed up the side, sinking knee-deep in hay. A small, white hand reached out, grabbed his, and pulled him to the top. "You made it, Juan!" the girl with the wet hair exclaimed.

“Do you mind if I drop the Don?” “You’ve got a thumb like mine!” he exclaimed. “And you’re holding my hand, which is dangerous without seeing my face	"Can I stop calling you 'Don'?" "Wow, you have a thumb like mine!" he said, surprised. "And you're holding my hand, which is risky when you can't see my face."

He dropped it quickly. As if in answer to his prayers came a flash of lightning and he looked eagerly at her who stood beside him on the soggy haystack, ten feet above the ground	He dropped it fast. Like his prayers were answered, lightning flashed, and he looked hopefully at her. She was standing next to him on the wet haystack, ten feet up.

But she had covered her face and he saw nothing but a slender figure, dark, damp, bobbed hair, and the small white hands with the thumbs that bent back like his. “Sit down,” she suggested politely, as the dark closed in on them	But she hid her face, so all he could see was her thin body, dark, wet, short hair, and small white hands with thumbs that bent backward like his. "Sit down," she said nicely, as it got darker around them.

“If you’ll sit opposite me in this hollow you can have half of the raincoat, which I was using as a waterproof tent until you so rudely interrupted me.” “I was asked,” Amory said joyfully; “you asked me—you know you did.” “Don Juan always manages that,” she said, laughing, “but I shan’t call you that any more, because you’ve got reddish hair. Instead you can recite ‘Ulalume’ and I’ll be Psyche, your soul	"If you sit across from me in this little dip in the ground, you can share my raincoat. I was using it like a tent until you barged in." "I was invited," Amory replied happily, "You asked me, and you know it." "Guys like Don Juan always do that," she said, laughing. "But I'm not calling you that anymore since you have reddish hair. Instead, you can read 'Ulalume' and I'll be Psyche, your soul."

Amory flushed, happily invisible under the curtain of wind and rain. They were sitting opposite each other in a slight hollow in the hay with the raincoat spread over most of them, and the rain doing for the rest. Amory was trying desperately to see Psyche, but the lightning refused to flash again, and he waited impatiently	Amory blushed, glad the wind and rain hid him. They sat facing each other in a little dip in the hay, mostly covered by a raincoat, with the rain taking care of the rest. Amory really wanted to see Psyche, but the lightning wouldn't flash again, and he waited, annoyed.

Good Lord! supposing she wasn’t beautiful—supposing she was forty and pedantic—heavens! Suppose, only suppose, she was mad. But he knew the last was unworthy. Here had Providence sent a girl to amuse him just as it sent Benvenuto Cellini men to murder, and he was wondering if she was mad, just because she exactly filled his mood. “I’m not,” she said	Oh my God! What if she wasn't pretty? What if she was forty and a know-it-all? Yikes! What if she was crazy? But he knew that last thought was wrong. Fate had sent him a girl to entertain him, like fate sent Benvenuto Cellini men to kill, and he was worrying if she was crazy just because she was exactly what he wanted right now. "I'm not," she said.

“Not what?” “Not mad. I didn’t think you were mad when I first saw you, so it isn’t fair that you should think so of me.” “How on earth—” As long as they knew each other Eleanor and Amory could be “on a subject” and stop talking with the definite thought of it in their heads, yet ten minutes later speak aloud and find that their minds had followed the same channels and led them each to a parallel idea, an idea that others would have found absolutely unconnected with the first. “Tell me,” he demanded, leaning forward eagerly, “how do you know about ‘Ulalume’—how did you know the color of my hair? What’s your name? What were you doing here? Tell me all at once!” Suddenly the lightning flashed in with a leap of overreaching light and he saw Eleanor, and looked for the first time into those eyes of hers	"Not what?" "Not angry. I didn't think you were angry when I met you, so it's not right for you to think I am." "How is that even—" Eleanor and Amory were able to be focused on something, and stop talking about it, knowing they both understood. But ten minutes later, they could start talking again and realize their thoughts had followed the same path, leading them both to a similar idea, one that other people wouldn't see any connection to. "Tell me," he asked, leaning forward, excited, "how do you know about 'Ulalume'? How did you know my hair color? What's your name? What were you doing here? Tell me everything now!" Suddenly, lightning flashed, lighting everything up, and he saw Eleanor, and really looked into her eyes for the first time.

Oh, she was magnificent—pale skin, the color of marble in starlight, slender brows, and eyes that glittered green as emeralds in the blinding glare. She was a witch, of perhaps nineteen, he judged, alert and dreamy and with the telltale white line over her upper lip that was a weakness and a delight. He sank back with a gasp against the wall of hay. “Now you’ve seen me,” she said calmly, “and I suppose you’re about to say that my green eyes are burning into your brain	Wow, she was stunning. Her skin was really pale, like marble glowing in the dark, with thin eyebrows and bright green eyes, like emeralds shining. She seemed like a magical person, maybe nineteen years old. She was sharp but also seemed lost in thought, and had a tiny, alluring line above her lip that hinted at a flaw. He leaned back, breathless, against the hay. "So, now you've seen me," she said, coolly. "I guess you're going to tell me my green eyes are messing with your head."

“What color is your hair?” he asked intently. “It’s bobbed, isn’t it?” “Yes, it’s bobbed	"What color is your hair?" he asked, really focused. "It's cut short, right?" "Yeah, it's short."

I don’t know what color it is,” she answered, musing, “so many men have asked me. It’s medium, I suppose—No one ever looks long at my hair. I’ve got beautiful eyes, though, haven’t I. I don’t care what you say, I have beautiful eyes	"I don't know what color it is," she said, thinking about it. "So many guys have asked. It's kind of average, I guess. Nobody really stares at my hair. But I have great eyes, right? I don't care what you say, my eyes are gorgeous."

“Answer my question, Madeline.” “Don’t remember them all—besides my name isn’t Madeline, it’s Eleanor	"Answer my question, Madeline." "I don't remember all the questions – and anyway, my name's not Madeline, it's Eleanor."

“I might have guessed it. You look like Eleanor—you have that Eleanor look. You know what I mean	"I should've known. You remind me of Eleanor—you have that Eleanor thing about you. You get what I'm saying?"

There was a silence as they listened to the rain. “It’s going down my neck, fellow lunatic,” she offered finally. “Answer my questions.” “Well—name of Savage, Eleanor; live in big old house mile down road; nearest living relation to be notified, grandfather—Ramilly Savage; height, five feet four inches; number on watch-case, 3077 W; nose, delicate aquiline; temperament, uncanny—” “And me,” Amory interrupted, “where did you see me?” “Oh, you’re one of those men,” she answered haughtily, “must lug old self into conversation	They listened to the rain in silence. "Rain's dripping down my neck, crazy," she finally said. "Answer my questions." "Okay—name is Eleanor Savage; I live in that big old house a mile down the road; the closest relative to contact is my grandfather, Ramilly Savage; I'm five foot four; the number on my watch is 3077 W; I have a delicate, slightly hooked nose; and my personality is kind of weird—" "And me," Amory cut in, "where did you see me?" "Oh, you're one of *those* guys," she replied, acting superior, "always gotta bring yourself into the conversation."

Well, my boy, I was behind a hedge sunning myself one day last week, and along comes a man saying in a pleasant, conceited way of talking: “ ‘And now when the night was senescent’ (says he) ‘And the star dials pointed to morn At the end of the path a liquescent’ (says he) ‘And nebulous lustre was born.’ “So I poked my eyes up over the hedge, but you had started to run, for some unknown reason, and so I saw but the back of your beautiful head	Okay, so last week I was chilling behind a bush, catching some sun. Then this guy walks by, talking in a kind of stuck-up, friendly way, and he starts reciting some poetry: "‘And now when the night was old, and the stars showed it was almost morning, at the end of the road a kind of melting, hazy light appeared.’" I peeked over the bush to see who it was, but you took off running for some reason, so all I saw was the back of your gorgeous head.

‘Oh!’ says I, ‘there’s a man for whom many of us might sigh,’ and I continued in my best Irish—” “All right,” Amory interrupted. “Now go back to yourself.” “Well, I will. I’m one of those people who go through the world giving other people thrills, but getting few myself except those I read into men on such nights as these	"Okay," I said, "that's a guy a lot of us would be interested in." And I kept talking with my fake Irish accent—" "Okay, stop it," Amory cut in. "Be yourself now." "Fine. I'm the type who gets others excited, but I don't experience much myself, except when I imagine things about guys on nights like this."

I have the social courage to go on the stage, but not the energy; I haven’t the patience to write books; and I never met a man I’d marry. However, I’m only eighteen	I'm confident enough to be on stage, but I'm too tired. I don't have the focus to write books. Plus, I haven't found a guy I'd want to marry. But hey, I'm only eighteen.

The storm was dying down softly and only the wind kept up its ghostly surge and made the stack lean and gravely settle from side to side. Amory was in a trance. He felt that every moment was precious	The storm was fading away quietly. Only the wind still blew like a ghost, making the haystack sway back and forth, slowly sinking down. Amory was lost in his thoughts, feeling that every second mattered.

He had never met a girl like this before—she would never seem quite the same again. He didn’t at all feel like a character in a play, the appropriate feeling in an unconventional situation—instead, he had a sense of coming home. “I have just made a great decision,” said Eleanor after another pause, “and that is why I’m here, to answer another of your questions	He'd never met a girl like her; she'd changed him. He didn't feel like he was acting in a movie, which you might expect in this weird situation. Instead, it felt like he was finally where he belonged. After a silence, Eleanor said, "I just made a big decision, and that's why I'm here, to answer another question you have."

I have just decided that I don’t believe in immortality.” “Really! how banal!” “Frightfully so,” she answered, “but depressing with a stale, sickly depression, nevertheless	"I've just decided I don't believe in living forever." "Oh, really? How boring!" "Totally," she replied, "but it's still depressing in a tired, gross way."

I came out here to get wet—like a wet hen; wet hens always have great clarity of mind,” she concluded. “Go on,” Amory said politely. “Well—I’m not afraid of the dark, so I put on my slicker and rubber boots and came out	I came out here to get soaked. Like, being soaking wet helps you think clearly," she said. "Keep going," Amory replied. "Okay, well, I'm not scared of the dark, so I put on my raincoat and boots and came outside."

You see I was always afraid, before, to say I didn’t believe in God—because the lightning might strike me—but here I am and it hasn’t, of course, but the main point is that this time I wasn’t any more afraid of it than I had been when I was a Christian Scientist, like I was last year. So now I know I’m a materialist and I was fraternizing with the hay when you came out and stood by the woods, scared to death.” “Why, you little wretch—” cried Amory indignantly. “Scared of what?” “Yourself!” she shouted, and he jumped	"You know, I used to be scared to say I didn't believe in God, like I'd get punished instantly. But look at me, nothing happened. The thing is, I wasn't any more afraid to say it now than I was last year when I was into Christian Science. So, I figured out I'm a materialist. And I was messing around in the hay when you showed up by the woods, totally freaked out." "You little brat!" Amory said, annoyed. "What were you scared of?" "You!" she yelled, making him jump.

She clapped her hands and laughed. “See—see! Conscience—kill it like me! Eleanor Savage, materiologist—no jumping, no starting, come early—” “But I have to have a soul,” he objected. “I can’t be rational—and I won’t be molecular.” She leaned toward him, her burning eyes never leaving his own and whispered with a sort of romantic finality: “I thought so, Juan, I feared so—you’re sentimental	She clapped and laughed. "Look, look! Get rid of your conscience—like I did! Eleanor Savage, realist—no surprises, no panicking, be on time." "But I need to have a soul," he said. "I can't be all logic—and I refuse to be just atoms." She leaned closer, staring intently at him, and whispered with a dramatic air of finality: "I knew it, Juan, I was afraid of it—you're a softie."

You’re not like me. I’m a romantic little materialist.” “I’m not sentimental—I’m as romantic as you are	You're different from me. I'm a romantic who likes nice things." "I'm not soft, but I'm just as romantic as you are."

The idea, you know, is that the sentimental person thinks things will last—the romantic person has a desperate confidence that they won’t.” (This was an ancient distinction of Amory’s.) “Epigrams	Basically, someone who's sentimental believes things will stay the same. A romantic, on the other hand, is pretty sure they won't. (Amory had been saying this for ages.) Catchy sayings...

I’m going home,” she said sadly. “Let’s get off the haystack and walk to the crossroads	"I'm going home," she said, sounding sad. "Let's get down from the haystack and walk to the intersection."

They slowly descended from their perch. She would not let him help her down and motioning him away arrived in a graceful lump in the soft mud where she sat for an instant, laughing at herself	They climbed down slowly. She refused his help, waved him away, and landed in a sort of elegant heap in the soft mud. She sat there for a moment, laughing at herself.

Then she jumped to her feet and slipped her hand into his, and they tiptoed across the fields, jumping and swinging from dry spot to dry spot. A transcendent delight seemed to sparkle in every pool of water, for the moon had risen and the storm had scurried away into western Maryland. When Eleanor’s arm touched his he felt his hands grow cold with deadly fear lest he should lose the shadow brush with which his imagination was painting wonders of her. He watched her from the corners of his eyes as ever he did when he walked with her—she was a feast and a folly and he wished it had been his destiny to sit forever on a haystack and see life through her green eyes	She suddenly stood up, took his hand, and they quietly walked through the fields, carefully hopping across the dry patches. The moonlight made every puddle seem magical, because the storm had moved away. When Eleanor's arm brushed against his, he got really scared that he might lose the ability to imagine her as amazing as he did. He kept glancing at her out of the corner of his eye, like he always did when they walked together. She was like something wonderful and crazy, and he wished he could just sit and watch life through her eyes forever.

His paganism soared that night and when she faded out like a gray ghost down the road, a deep singing came out of the fields and filled his way homeward. All night the summer moths flitted in and out of Amory’s window; all night large looming sounds swayed in mystic revery through the silver grain—and he lay awake in the clear darkness.	He felt incredibly alive that night. When she disappeared down the road like a ghost, he heard music coming from the fields as he walked home. All night, moths flew in and out of his window. All night, big, mysterious sounds echoed through the fields of wheat—and he stayed awake in the dark.

Amory selected a blade of grass and nibbled at it scientifically. “I never fall in love in August or September,” he proffered	Amory picked a piece of grass and chewed on it thoughtfully. "I never fall in love in August or September," he offered.

“When then?” “Christmas or Easter. I’m a liturgist.” “Easter!” She turned up her nose. “Huh! Spring in corsets!” “Easter would bore spring, wouldn’t she? Easter has her hair braided, wears a tailored suit	"So when?" "Christmas or Easter. I'm into religious stuff." "Easter!" She wrinkled her nose. "Ugh! Spring all dressed up and stiff!" "Yeah, Easter would be boring to Spring, right? Easter's got her hair neat, wears a boring suit."

“Bind on thy sandals, oh, thou most fleet. Over the splendor and speed of thy feet—” quoted Eleanor softly, and then added: “I suppose Halloween is a better day for autumn than Thanksgiving.” “Much better—and Christmas eve does very well for winter, but summer.” “Summer has no day,” she said	"Tie your shoes, you fast one. Think of how amazing and quick your feet are," Eleanor said quietly, then added, "I think Halloween fits autumn better than Thanksgiving." "Way better. And Christmas Eve is perfect for winter, but summer..." "Summer doesn't have its own day," she finished.

“We can’t possibly have a summer love. So many people have tried that the name’s become proverbial	"We can't do a summer fling. Too many people have tried it, it's become a cliché."

Summer is only the unfulfilled promise of spring, a charlatan in place of the warm balmy nights I dream of in April. It’s a sad season of life without growth. It has no day.” “Fourth of July,” Amory suggested facetiously	Summer's just spring's broken promise. It's a fake, not those warm, dreamy nights I think about in April. It's a depressing time of no progress. It's got nothing good going for it." "Except the Fourth of July," Amory joked.

“Don’t be funny!” she said, raking him with her eyes. “Well, what could fulfil the promise of spring?” She thought a moment. “Oh, I suppose heaven would, if there was one,” she said finally, “a sort of pagan heaven—you ought to be a materialist,” she continued irrelevantly	"Don't be a smart aleck!" she said, giving him a hard look. "So, what could possibly live up to the hype of spring?" She paused. "I guess maybe heaven, if it existed," she said after a moment, "like, a down-to-earth heaven. You should be a realist," she added, seemingly out of nowhere.

“Why?” “Because you look a good deal like the pictures of Rupert Brooke.” To some extent Amory tried to play Rupert Brooke as long as he knew Eleanor. What he said, his attitude toward life, toward her, toward himself, were all reflexes of the dead Englishman’s literary moods. Often she sat in the grass, a lazy wind playing with her short hair, her voice husky as she ran up and down the scale from Grantchester to Waikiki	"Why?" "Because you look a lot like those photos of Rupert Brooke." Amory even tried to act like Rupert Brooke when he was with Eleanor. His words, his outlook on life, on her, and on himself, were all copied from the dead writer's books. She'd often sit in the grass, a gentle breeze ruffling her hair, her voice a little rough as she talked about everything from England to Hawaii.

There was something most passionate in Eleanor’s reading aloud. They seemed nearer, not only mentally, but physically, when they read, than when she was in his arms, and this was often, for they fell half into love almost from the first. Yet was Amory capable of love now? He could, as always, run through the emotions in a half hour, but even while they revelled in their imaginations, he knew that neither of them could care as he had cared once before—I suppose that was why they turned to Brooke, and Swinburne, and Shelley. Their chance was to make everything fine and finished and rich and imaginative; they must bend tiny golden tentacles from his imagination to hers, that would take the place of the great, deep love that was never so near, yet never so much of a dream	Eleanor read with intense feeling. When they read together, they felt closer, both in mind and body, than when they were even hugging—which happened a lot since they almost fell in love right away. But could Amory really love anyone at this point? He could still feel emotions quickly, but even when they were lost in their fantasies, he knew they couldn’t love each other the way he’d loved someone before. Maybe that’s why they read poetry by people like Brooke, Swinburne, and Shelley. They wanted to create something beautiful, perfect, and full of imagination. They needed to build tiny, delicate connections between their imaginations to replace the big, deep love that felt so close but was really just a fantasy.

One poem they read over and over; Swinburne’s Triumph of Time, and four lines of it rang in his memory afterward on warm nights when he saw the fireflies among dusky tree trunks and heard the low drone of many frogs. Then Eleanor seemed to come out of the night and stand by him, and he heard her throaty voice, with its tone of a fleecy-headed drum, repeating: “Is it worth a tear, is it worth an hour, To think of things that are well outworn; Of fruitless husk and fugitive flower, The dream foregone and the deed foreborne?” They were formally introduced two days later, and his aunt told him her history	They kept rereading one poem, Swinburne’s "Triumph of Time." Later, on warm nights, those four lines would get stuck in his head whenever he saw fireflies near the dark trees and heard frogs croaking. Eleanor would seem to appear out of the darkness and stand beside him, and he could hear her deep voice, like a muffled drum, reciting: "Is it worth a tear, is it worth an hour, To think of things that are well outworn; Of fruitless husk and fugitive flower, The dream foregone and the deed foreborne?" He officially met her two days later, and his aunt told him about her past.

The Ramillys were two: old Mr. Ramilly and his granddaughter, Eleanor. She had lived in France with a restless mother whom Amory imagined to have been very like his own, on whose death she had come to America, to live in Maryland	There were two Ramillys: the old Mr. Ramilly and his granddaughter, Eleanor. She used to live in France with her mom, who Amory thought was probably a lot like his own mom. After her mom died, Eleanor moved to America to live in Maryland.

She had gone to Baltimore first to stay with a bachelor uncle, and there she insisted on being a debutante at the age of seventeen. She had a wild winter and arrived in the country in March, having quarrelled frantically with all her Baltimore relatives, and shocked them into fiery protest. A rather fast crowd had come out, who drank cocktails in limousines and were promiscuously condescending and patronizing toward older people, and Eleanor with an esprit that hinted strongly of the boulevards, led many innocents still redolent of St. Timothy’s and Farmington, into paths of Bohemian naughtiness.	She went to Baltimore to live with her single uncle and demanded to have a debutante ball when she was seventeen. She had a crazy winter, then showed up in the countryside in March after fighting a lot with her family in Baltimore, who were super angry about it. A group of somewhat scandalous people started going out, drinking cocktails in fancy cars and acting superior and snobby toward older folks. Eleanor, with a vibe that felt very European and worldly, led a lot of innocent girls from St. Timothy’s and Farmington into a world of artsy and rebellious fun.

When the story came to her uncle, a forgetful cavalier of a more hypocritical era, there was a scene, from which Eleanor emerged, subdued but rebellious and indignant, to seek haven with her grandfather who hovered in the country on the near side of senility. That’s as far as her story went; she told him the rest herself, but that was later. Often they swam and as Amory floated lazily in the water he shut his mind to all thoughts except those of hazy soap-bubble lands where the sun splattered through wind-drunk trees	When her uncle, a somewhat phony guy stuck in his old-fashioned ways, heard about it, there was a big fight. Eleanor left, feeling down but still angry and defiant, and went to stay with her grandfather, who lived in the country and was getting pretty old and forgetful. That's all she told Amory at first. She told him the rest later herself. They often went swimming, and when Amory was floating in the water, he tried to clear his head of everything except peaceful, dreamlike images of sunlight shining through trees swaying in the wind.

How could anyone possibly think or worry, or do anything except splash and dive and loll there on the edge of time while the flower months failed. Let the days move over—sadness and memory and pain recurred outside, and here, once more, before he went on to meet them he wanted to drift and be young. There were days when Amory resented that life had changed from an even progress along a road stretching ever in sight, with the scenery merging and blending, into a succession of quick, unrelated scenes—two years of sweat and blood, that sudden absurd instinct for paternity that Rosalind had stirred; the half-sensual, half-neurotic quality of this autumn with Eleanor	Why bother thinking, worrying, or doing anything other than swimming, relaxing, and just hanging out? Let the days pass. Sadness, memories, and pain are waiting outside. Here, he just wants to chill and be young again before facing them. There were times Amory hated that life wasn't a smooth journey anymore, where you could see the road ahead. Instead, it was now a bunch of quick, separate events: two years of hard work and fighting, that sudden crazy urge to be a father that Rosalind caused, and this weird mix of physical attraction and emotional instability he felt with Eleanor this fall.

He felt that it would take all time, more than he could ever spare, to glue these strange cumbersome pictures into the scrapbook of his life. It was all like a banquet where he sat for this half-hour of his youth and tried to enjoy brilliant epicurean courses. Dimly he promised himself a time where all should be welded together. For months it seemed that he had alternated between being borne along a stream of love or fascination, or left in an eddy, and in the eddies he had not desired to think, rather to be picked up on a wave’s top and swept along again	It felt like it would take forever, way more time than he had, to make sense of all these weird and complicated experiences and fit them into his life story. It was like a fancy feast where he only got a short time to try all the amazing dishes. He vaguely hoped for a future time when it would all come together. For months, he felt like he was either swept away by love or infatuation, or stuck in a backwater. When he was stuck, he didn't want to think, he just wanted to be caught by a wave and carried along again.

“The despairing, dying autumn and our love—how well they harmonize!” said Eleanor sadly one day as they lay dripping by the water. “The Indian summer of our hearts—” he ceased. “Tell me,” she said finally, “was she light or dark?” “Light	"Autumn's ending, like our love—it's so sad and fits us perfectly," Eleanor said, lying wet by the water. "The best part of our love is ending..." He stopped. "Tell me," she asked, "was she blonde or brunette?" "Blonde."

“Was she more beautiful than I am?” “I don’t know,” said Amory shortly. One night they walked while the moon rose and poured a great burden of glory over the garden until it seemed fairyland with Amory and Eleanor, dim phantasmal shapes, expressing eternal beauty in curious elfin love moods. Then they turned out of the moonlight into the trellised darkness of a vine-hung pagoda, where there were scents so plaintive as to be nearly musical	"Was she prettier than me?" "I don't know," Amory said, cutting her off. One night, they walked as the moon came up, making the garden look amazing, like a magical place with Amory and Eleanor as blurry, ghost-like figures showing timeless beauty with their strange, playful love. Then they went from the moonlight into the dark, vine-covered gazebo, where the smells were so sad they almost sounded like music.

“Light a match,” she whispered. “I want to see you.” Scratch! Flare! The night and the scarred trees were like scenery in a play, and to be there with Eleanor, shadowy and unreal, seemed somehow oddly familiar	"Light a match," she whispered. "I want to see you." *Scratch! Flare!* The night and the damaged trees looked like a stage set, and being there with Eleanor, so shadowy and dreamlike, felt strangely like I'd been there before.

Amory thought how it was only the past that ever seemed strange and unbelievable. The match went out. “It’s black as pitch.” “We’re just voices now,” murmured Eleanor, “little lonesome voices	Amory was thinking about how only the past ever feels weird and hard to believe. The match went out. “It's totally dark.” “We're just voices now,” Eleanor whispered, “small, lonely voices.”

Light another.” “That was my last match.” Suddenly he caught her in his arms	"Gimme another light." "That was my last match." Then, out of nowhere, he grabbed her.

“You are mine—you know you’re mine!” he cried wildly. the moonlight twisted in through the vines and listened. the fireflies hung upon their whispers as if to win his glance from the glory of their eyes	"You're mine, you know you're mine!" he shouted, losing control. The moonlight snaked through the vines, seeming to eavesdrop. The fireflies seemed to linger on their hushed words, trying to pull his attention away from how beautiful her eyes were.

“No wind is stirring in the grass; not one wind stirs. the water in the hidden pools, as glass, fronts the full moon and so inters the golden token in its icy mass,” chanted Eleanor to the trees that skeletoned the body of the night. “Isn’t it ghostly here? If you can hold your horse’s feet up, let’s cut through the woods and find the hidden pools.” “It’s after one, and you’ll get the devil,” he objected, “and I don’t know enough about horses to put one away in the pitch dark	Eleanor recited to the bare trees against the night sky, "The grass is still, no breeze at all. The hidden pools are like glass, reflecting the full moon and trapping its golden light in their cold depths." Then she said, "Isn't it creepy here? If you can keep your horse quiet, let's go through the woods and find those pools." He replied, "It's past one o'clock, you'll be in big trouble. Plus, I don't know enough about horses to take care of one in the complete dark."

“Shut up, you old fool,” she whispered irrelevantly, and, leaning over, she patted him lazily with her riding-crop. “You can leave your old plug in our stable and I’ll send him over tomorrow.” “But my uncle has got to drive me to the station with this old plug at seven o’clock.” “Don’t be a spoilsport—remember, you have a tendency toward wavering that prevents you from being the entire light of my life	"Be quiet, you silly old man," she said, for no real reason. She leaned over and gave him a light tap with her riding crop. "You can leave your old horse at our stable, and I'll send it over to you tomorrow." "But my uncle needs to drive me to the train station at seven o'clock with this old horse." "Don't be a party pooper. Remember, you can be indecisive, and that keeps you from being perfect for me."

Amory drew his horse up close beside, and, leaning toward her, grasped her hand. “Say I am—quick, or I’ll pull you over and make you ride behind me.” She looked up and smiled and shook her head excitedly	Amory rode his horse right next to her, leaned in, and grabbed her hand. "Tell me you do," he said quickly, "or I'll pull you off and make you ride with me." She looked up, smiled, and shook her head, thrilled.

“Oh, do!—or rather, don’t! Why are all the exciting things so uncomfortable, like fighting and exploring and skiing in Canada? By the way, we’re going to ride up Harper’s Hill. I think that comes in our programme about five o’clock.” “You little devil,” Amory growled	"Oh, please do! Actually, never mind! Why are all the fun things so hard, like fighting, exploring, or skiing in Canada? Anyway, we're going for a ride up Harper's Hill. I think that's on the schedule around five." Amory playfully said, "You little rascal."

“You’re going to make me stay up all night and sleep in the train like an immigrant all day tomorrow, going back to New York.” “Hush! someone’s coming along the road—let’s go! Whoo-ee-oop!” And with a shout that probably gave the belated traveller a series of shivers, she turned her horse into the woods and Amory followed slowly, as he had followed her all day for three weeks. The summer was over, but he had spent the days in watching Eleanor, a graceful, facile Manfred, build herself intellectual and imaginative pyramids while she revelled in the artificialities of the temperamental teens and they wrote poetry at the dinner-table. When Vanity kissed Vanity, a hundred happy Junes ago, he pondered o’er her breathlessly, and, that all men might ever know, he rhymed her eyes with life and death: “Through Time I’ll save my love!” he said	"You'll keep me up all night, and then I'll have to sleep on the train like a poor tourist all the way back to New York tomorrow." "Quiet! Someone's coming down the road—let's go!" She yelled something loud that probably scared whoever was walking by, then turned her horse into the woods. Amory followed, like he had been doing for three weeks. Summer was over, and he'd spent it watching Eleanor, this elegant and talented person, build up her intellectual and creative ideas while enjoying being a dramatic teenager. They even wrote poems during dinner. He remembered a time long ago when he was really infatuated with someone, and he wrote about her: "I'll love you forever!"

yet Beauty vanished with his breath, and, with her lovers, she was dead. —Ever his wit and not her eyes, ever his art and not her hair: “Who’d learn a trick in rhyme, be wise and pause before his sonnet there”	But when he died, beauty disappeared, along with everyone who loved her. He always valued his own cleverness, not her beauty; his own art, not her looks. "Anyone writing poetry should think twice before writing about it."

So all my words, however true, might sing you to a thousandth June, and no one ever know that you were Beauty for an afternoon. So he wrote one day, when he pondered how coldly we thought of the “Dark Lady of the Sonnets,” and how little we remembered her as the great man wanted her remembered. For what Shakespeare must have desired, to have been able to write with such divine despair, was that the lady should live. and now we have no real interest in her	Even if all my poems, no matter how honest, could celebrate you endlessly, no one would ever realize you were beautiful for just a short time. He wrote this thinking about how little we care about Shakespeare's "Dark Lady," and how we don't remember her the way he wanted us to. Because what Shakespeare probably wanted, to write with such incredible sadness, was for her to be immortalized. But now, we don't really care about her.

The irony of it is that if he had cared more for the poem than for the lady the sonnet would be only obvious, imitative rhetoric and no one would ever have read it after twenty years. This was the last night Amory ever saw Eleanor. He was leaving in the morning and they had agreed to take a long farewell trot by the cold moonlight	It's funny, because if he'd focused more on the poem than on Eleanor, the sonnet would've been boring and unoriginal, and nobody would still be reading it now. This was the last time Amory saw Eleanor. He was leaving the next day, and they'd decided to go for one last ride together in the cold moonlight to say goodbye.

She wanted to talk, she said—perhaps the last time in her life that she could be rational (she meant pose with comfort). So they had turned into the woods and rode for half an hour with scarcely a word, except when she whispered “Damn!” at a bothersome branch—whispered it as no other girl was ever able to whisper it	She wanted to talk, saying this might be the last time she could think clearly (she really meant relax and be herself). So, they went into the woods and rode in silence for about half an hour, except when she quietly said "Damn!" at an annoying branch—the way she said it was unique.

Then they started up Harper’s Hill, walking their tired horses. “Good Lord! It’s quiet here!” whispered Eleanor; “much more lonesome than the woods.” “I hate woods,” Amory said, shuddering	They started walking their tired horses up Harper's Hill. Eleanor whispered, "Wow, it's so quiet here! Even lonelier than the woods." Amory said, "I hate woods," and shivered.

“Any kind of foliage or underbrush at night. Out here it’s so broad and easy on the spirit	"Any plants or bushes at night. It's so open and calming out here."

“The long slope of a long hill.” “And the cold moon rolling moonlight down it.” “And thee and me, last and most important.” It was quiet that night—the straight road they followed up to the edge of the cliff knew few footsteps at any time	"A long, gradual hill." "With a cold moon shining down on it." "And you and me, the best part of all." It was quiet that night. The road to the cliff wasn't used much anyway.

Only an occasional negro cabin, silver-gray in the rock-ribbed moonlight, broke the long line of bare ground; behind lay the black edge of the woods like a dark frosting on white cake, and ahead the sharp, high horizon. It was much colder—so cold that it settled on them and drove all the warm nights from their minds. “The end of summer,” said Eleanor softly	Just a few scattered, dark houses stood out in the rocky, moonlit landscape. Behind them, the dark woods looked like icing on a white cake. Ahead, the horizon was sharp and high. It got much colder, a cold that they felt deep down, pushing away any memories of warm nights. "Summer's over," Eleanor said quietly.

“Listen to the beat of our horses’ hoofs—‘tump-tump-tump-a-tump.’ Have you ever been feverish and had all noises divide into ‘tump-tump-tump’ until you could swear eternity was divisible into so many tumps? That’s the way I feel—old horses go tump-tump. I guess that’s the only thing that separates horses and clocks from us	"Listen to the sound of the horses' hooves – thump-thump-thump. Ever been sick with a fever and all you could hear was 'thump-thump-thump,' like forever could be measured in thumps? That's how I feel. Old horses go thump-thump. I guess that's the only difference between horses and clocks and us."

Human beings can’t go ‘tump-tump-tump’ without going crazy.” The breeze freshened and Eleanor pulled her cape around her and shivered. “Are you very cold?” asked Amory. “No, I’m thinking about myself—my black old inside self, the real one, with the fundamental honesty that keeps me from being absolutely wicked by making me realize my own sins	People can't just go on and on without losing their minds." The wind picked up, and Eleanor wrapped her cape tighter around herself and shivered. "Are you freezing?" Amory asked. "No, I'm just thinking about myself—my dark, inner self, the true me, with the basic honesty that stops me from being completely evil by making me aware of my own flaws."

They were riding up close by the cliff and Amory gazed over. Where the fall met the ground a hundred feet below, a black stream made a sharp line, broken by tiny glints in the swift water. “Rotten, rotten old world,” broke out Eleanor suddenly, “and the wretchedest thing of all is me—oh, why am I a girl? Why am I not a stupid—? Look at you; you’re stupider than I am, not much, but some, and you can lope about and get bored and then lope somewhere else, and you can play around with girls without being involved in meshes of sentiment, and you can do anything and be justified—and here am I with the brains to do everything, yet tied to the sinking ship of future matrimony	They were riding near the edge of the cliff, and Amory looked down. Where the waterfall hit the ground far below, a dark stream made a distinct line, with little flashes of light in the fast-moving water. "This world sucks," Eleanor blurted out. "And the worst thing is me. Why am I a girl? Why can't I be dumb? Like you. You're dumber than me, not by much, but you are. You can wander around, get bored, and then wander somewhere else. You can mess around with girls without getting all emotionally tangled up. You can do anything and it's okay. But me? I'm smart enough to do anything, but I'm stuck waiting to get married."

If I were born a hundred years from now, well and good, but now what’s in store for me—I have to marry, that goes without saying. Who? I’m too bright for most men, and yet I have to descend to their level and let them patronize my intellect in order to get their attention. Every year that I don’t marry I’ve got less chance for a first-class man. At the best I can have my choice from one or two cities and, of course, I have to marry into a dinner-coat	If I was born in the future, great. But what am I supposed to do now? I have to get married, obviously. But to who? I'm too smart for most guys, and I have to dumb myself down so they'll even notice me. Every year I'm not married, my chances of finding a great guy get worse. At best, I only have a few cities to choose from, and I have to marry someone rich.

“Listen,” she leaned close again, “I like clever men and good-looking men, and, of course, no one cares more for personality than I do. Oh, just one person in fifty has any glimmer of what sex is. I’m hipped on Freud and all that, but it’s rotten that every bit of real love in the world is ninety-nine percent passion and one little soupçon of jealousy.” She finished as suddenly as she began	"Hey," she said, leaning in close again, "I like smart guys and hot guys, and nobody values personality more than I do, obviously. Seriously, like only one in fifty people gets what sex is really about. I'm obsessed with Freud and all that stuff, but it sucks that real love is almost all lust and just a tiny bit of jealousy." She stopped as quickly as she started talking.

“Of course, you’re right,” Amory agreed. “It’s a rather unpleasant overpowering force that’s part of the machinery under everything. It’s like an actor that lets you see his mechanics! Wait a minute till I think this out.” He paused and tried to get a metaphor	"Yeah, you're right," Amory said. "It's this gross, powerful thing that's underneath everything, like a machine. It's like seeing how an actor's tricks work! Hold on, let me figure this out." He stopped, trying to find a good way to describe it.

They had turned the cliff and were riding along the road about fifty feet to the left. “You see everyone’s got to have some cloak to throw around it. The mediocre intellects, Plato’s second class, use the remnants of romantic chivalry diluted with Victorian sentiment—and we who consider ourselves the intellectuals cover it up by pretending that it’s another side of us, has nothing to do with our shining brains; we pretend that the fact that we realize it is really absolving us from being a prey to it	They'd gone around the bend and were driving down the road a little ways away. "You know, everyone needs something to hide behind. People who aren't that smart, the average thinkers, use old-fashioned romance mixed with Victorian feelings. And those of us who think we're smart pretend it's just a different part of us, nothing to do with our brilliant minds. We act like knowing we're doing it somehow makes it okay."

But the truth is that sex is right in the middle of our purest abstractions, so close that it obscures vision. I can kiss you now and will.” He leaned toward her in his saddle, but she drew away. “I can’t—I can’t kiss you now—I’m more sensitive	The truth is, sex is connected to even our most high-minded ideas, so closely that it can blind us. I could kiss you right now, and I want to.” He leaned in to kiss her while still on his horse, but she moved back. “I can’t—I can’t kiss you right now—I’m too sensitive."

“You’re more stupid then,” he declared rather impatiently. “Intellect is no protection from sex any more than convention is.” “What is?” she fired up. “The Catholic Church or the maxims of Confucius?” Amory looked up, rather taken aback	"Then you're even dumber," he said, annoyed. "Being smart doesn't stop you from wanting sex any more than following the rules does." "So what does?" she snapped back. "Religion? Or old sayings?" Amory was surprised by her reaction.

“That’s your panacea, isn’t it?” she cried. “Oh, you’re just an old hypocrite, too. Thousands of scowling priests keeping the degenerate Italians and illiterate Irish repentant with gabble-gabble about the sixth and ninth commandments	"So, that's your cure-all, right?" she yelled. "Oh, you're just another hypocrite. Thousands of angry priests keep those messed-up Italians and uneducated Irish feeling guilty by constantly rambling on about sex and greed."

It’s just all cloaks, sentiment and spiritual rouge and panaceas. I’ll tell you there is no God, not even a definite abstract goodness; so it’s all got to be worked out for the individual by the individual here in high white foreheads like mine, and you’re too much the prig to admit it.” She let go her reins and shook her little fists at the stars. “If there’s a God let him strike me—strike me!” “Talking about God again after the manner of atheists,” Amory said sharply	It's all fake – feelings, religion, and easy answers. I'm telling you, there's no God, no real, pure goodness. So, we each have to figure things out for ourselves, using our brains. And you're too uptight to admit it.” She dropped the reins and shook her fists at the stars. “If there's a God, let him strike me down – strike me!” "Talking about God like only atheists do," Amory snapped.

His materialism, always a thin cloak, was torn to shreds by Eleanor’s blasphemy. She knew it and it angered him that she knew it. “And like most intellectuals who don’t find faith convenient,” he continued coldly, “like Napoleon and Oscar Wilde and the rest of your type, you’ll yell loudly for a priest on your deathbed	His shallow belief in material things was completely destroyed by Eleanor's disrespect for religion. She knew this, which made him mad. He went on coldly, "And like most smart people who find religion inconvenient, like Napoleon and Oscar Wilde and others like you, you'll desperately want a priest when you're dying."

Eleanor drew her horse up sharply and he reined in beside her. “Will I?” she said in a queer voice that scared him. “Will I? Watch! I’m going over the cliff!” And before he could interfere she had turned and was riding breakneck for the end of the plateau. He wheeled and started after her, his body like ice, his nerves in a vast clangor	Eleanor stopped her horse suddenly, and he stopped right next to her. "Will I do it?" she asked, her voice strange and frightening. "Will I? Just watch! I'm going to ride off the cliff!" Before he could stop her, she'd turned and was racing toward the edge of the plateau. He spun around and chased after her, his body frozen, his nerves screaming.

There was no chance of stopping her. The moon was under a cloud and her horse would step blindly over. Then some ten feet from the edge of the cliff she gave a sudden shriek and flung herself sideways—plunged from her horse and, rolling over twice, landed in a pile of brush five feet from the edge	There was no way to stop her. The moon was hidden, and her horse was about to step over the cliff without seeing it. Then, when she was about ten feet from the edge, she suddenly screamed, threw herself to the side, jumped off her horse, rolled over twice, and landed in a pile of bushes only five feet from the edge.

The horse went over with a frantic whinny. In a minute he was by Eleanor’s side and saw that her eyes were open	The horse fell, making a scared neigh. Soon he was next to Eleanor and saw she was awake.

“Eleanor!” he cried. She did not answer, but her lips moved and her eyes filled with sudden tears. “Eleanor, are you hurt?” “No; I don’t think so,” she said faintly, and then began weeping	"Eleanor!" he called out. She didn't respond, but her lips trembled, and tears suddenly welled up in her eyes. "Eleanor, are you injured?" "No, I don't believe so," she replied weakly, and then she started crying.

“My horse dead?” “Good God—Yes!” “Oh!” she wailed. “I thought I was going over	"My horse is dead?" "Oh my God, yes!" "Oh!" she cried. "I thought I was going to die."

I didn’t know—” He helped her gently to her feet and boosted her onto his saddle. So they started homeward; Amory walking and she bent forward on the pommel, sobbing bitterly	"I didn't know..." He carefully helped her up and put her on his horse. They headed home: Amory walked while she leaned over the front of the saddle, crying hard.

“I’ve got a crazy streak,” she faltered, “twice before I’ve done things like that. When I was eleven mother went—went mad—stark raving crazy. We were in Vienna—” All the way back she talked haltingly about herself, and Amory’s love waned slowly with the moon	"I'm kind of impulsive," she stammered. "I've done crazy stuff like that a couple of times before. When I was eleven, my mom went completely insane. We were in Vienna..." The whole trip back, she kept talking nervously about herself, and Amory slowly fell out of love with her.

At her door they started from habit to kiss good night, but she could not run into his arms, nor were they stretched to meet her as in the week before. For a minute they stood there, hating each other with a bitter sadness	At her door, they automatically went to kiss good night. But she couldn't bring herself to hug him, and he didn't reach for her like he had the week before. They just stood there, feeling a sad, bitter hatred for each other.

But as Amory had loved himself in Eleanor, so now what he hated was only a mirror. Their poses were strewn about the pale dawn like broken glass. The stars were long gone and there were left only the little sighing gusts of wind and the silences between	Just like Amory used to love seeing himself reflected in Eleanor, now he only saw things he hated. Their fake personalities were scattered around in the early light like shattered glass. The stars had disappeared, and all that was left was the soft, whispering wind and the quiet gaps between them.

but naked souls are poor things ever, and soon he turned homeward and let new lights come in with the sun.	Being completely vulnerable is tough, so he went home and started fresh the next day.

“Here, Earthborn, over the lilt of the water, Lisping its music and bearing a burden of light, Bosoming day as a laughing and radiant daughter. Here we may whisper unheard, unafraid of the night	"Hey, you, listening to the water's gentle song, as it carries light and welcomes the day like a happy, bright girl, we can talk quietly here, without anyone hearing us, and not be scared of the dark."

Walking alone. was it splendor, or what, we were bound with, Deep in the time when summer lets down her hair? Shadows we loved and the patterns they covered the ground with Tapestries, mystical, faint in the breathless air	Walking by myself, I wondered what connected us so strongly back then, during those carefree summer days. We loved the shadows and the designs they made on the ground, like faded, magical tapestries in the still air.

That was the day. and the night for another story, Pale as a dream and shadowed with pencilled trees— Ghosts of the stars came by who had sought for glory, Whispered to us of peace in the plaintive breeze, Whispered of old dead faiths that the day had shattered, Youth the penny that bought delight of the moon; That was the urge that we knew and the language that mattered That was the debt that we paid to the usurer June. Here, deepest of dreams, by the waters that bring not Anything back of the past that we need not know, What if the light is but sun and the little streams sing not, We are together, it seems	That day (and the night is another story) was like a faded dream with trees drawn in the shadows. Lost stars, once searching for fame, passed by and quietly told us about finding peace in the soft wind. They spoke of old, forgotten beliefs that time had destroyed. Youth was like a coin spent for the moon's joy. That's what we wanted, what truly mattered, and what we owed to the summer's demanding beauty. Here, in this deep dream, by the waters that don't bring back the past we want to forget, so what if the light is just sunlight and the streams don't really sing? At least we're together.

I have loved you so. What did the last night hold, with the summer over, Drawing us back to the home in the changing glade? What leered out of the dark in the ghostly clover? God!. till you stirred in your sleep	I loved you so much. What happened last night, now that summer’s done, pulling us back home to the changing woods? What scared me in the dark among the pale clover? God! Then you moved in your sleep.

We are chronicle now to the eerie. Curious metal from meteors that failed in the sky; Earthborn the tireless is stretched by the water, quite weary, Close to this ununderstandable changeling that’s I. Fear is an echo we traced to Security’s daughter; Now we are faces and voices	Now we're just recording strange things, like failed meteors in the sky. The strong, tireless earth is tired by the water, near this confusing, changed version of myself. Fear comes from something that once felt safe. Now we are just faces and voices.

and less, too soon, Whispering half-love over the lilt of the water. Youth the penny that bought delight of the moon.”	And too soon, they were whispering half-hearted love while listening to the water. Youth is like a coin you spend to enjoy the magic of the night.

“Faint winds, and a song fading and leaves falling, Faint winds, and far away a fading laughter. And the rain and over the fields a voice calling	Soft breezes, a song dying out, and leaves dropping. Soft breezes, and laughter fading in the distance. Then rain, and a voice calling over the fields.

Our gray blown cloud scurries and lifts above, Slides on the sun and flutters there to waft her Sisters on. The shadow of a dove Falls on the cote, the trees are filled with wings; And down the valley through the crying trees The body of the darker storm flies; brings With its new air the breath of sunken seas And slender tenuous thunder. But I wait. Wait for the mists and for the blacker rain— Heavier winds that stir the veil of fate, Happier winds that pile her hair; Again They tear me, teach me, strew the heavy air Upon me, winds that I know, and storm	The grey clouds rush overhead, moving quickly across the sun, pushing other clouds along. A dove's shadow falls on the dovecote, and the trees are full of birds. Down the valley, through the noisy trees, the bigger, darker storm comes, bringing with it fresh, sea-smelling air and faint, distant thunder. I'm waiting. Waiting for the fog and the heavy rain—stronger winds that reveal what's going to happen, happier winds that mess up her hair. Again, the winds tear at me, teach me, and fill the air around me—winds and storms I recognize.

There was a summer every rain was rare; There was a season every wind was warm. And now you pass me in the mist. your hair Rain-blown about you, damp lips curved once more In that wild irony, that gay despair That made you old when we have met before; Wraithlike you drift on out before the rain, Across the fields, blown with the stemless flowers, With your old hopes, dead leaves and loves again— Dim as a dream and wan with all old hours (Whispers will creep into the growing dark. Tumult will die over the trees) Now night Tears from her wetted breast the splattered blouse Of day, glides down the dreaming hills, tear-bright, To cover with her hair the eerie green	I remember a summer when it hardly ever rained, and a time when the wind was always warm. Now I see you in the fog. Your rain-soaked hair is around your face, and your lips curve in that familiar sad smile, that mix of wild humor and hopelessness that made you seem older than you were when we first met. Like a ghost, you fade away before the rain, across the fields scattered with wildflowers, along with your past hopes, forgotten memories, and old loves. You seem like a faint dream, pale with the weight of years gone by. (Secrets will spread as darkness falls. The noise will fade away in the trees.) Now night pulls the light from the sky like a wet shirt, sliding down the hills, glistening with tears, and hides the strange, green world with her dark hair.

Love for the dusk. Love for the glistening after; Quiet the trees to their last tops	Loved the evening. Loved the shimmer afterwards; Trees were still and silent, reaching high.

serene. Faint winds, and far away a fading laughter.”	Peaceful. A light breeze, and laughter drifting from a distance.

Atlantic City. Amory paced the board walk at day’s end, lulled by the everlasting surge of changing waves, smelling the half-mournful odor of the salt breeze. The sea, he thought, had treasured its memories deeper than the faithless land. It seemed still to whisper of Norse galleys ploughing the water world under raven-figured flags, of the British dreadnoughts, gray bulwarks of civilization steaming up through the fog of one dark July into the North Sea	Atlantic City. As the day ended, Amory walked along the boardwalk, soothed by the constant rhythm of the waves and the salty, slightly sad smell of the ocean air. He felt the sea held onto its history better than the unreliable land. It seemed to whisper stories of Viking ships sailing under raven flags, and of powerful British warships, gray and strong, steaming into the North Sea through the fog of a dark July.

“Well—Amory Blaine!” Amory looked down into the street below. A low racing car had drawn to a stop and a familiar cheerful face protruded from the driver’s seat	"Hey, Amory Blaine!" Amory glanced down at the street. A fancy sports car had just pulled up, and a friendly face he knew popped out from behind the wheel.

“Come on down, goopher!” cried Alec. Amory called a greeting and descending a flight of wooden steps approached the car. He and Alec had been meeting intermittently, but the barrier of Rosalind lay always between them. He was sorry for this; he hated to lose Alec	"Hey, slowpoke, get down here!" Alec yelled. Amory shouted hello and walked down the wooden steps to the car. He and Alec had been hanging out every now and then, but Rosalind always made things awkward between them. He was bummed about that; he didn't want to lose Alec as a friend.

“Mr. Blaine, this is Miss Waterson, Miss Wayne, and Mr. Tully	"Mr. Blaine, meet Miss Waterson, Miss Wayne, and Mr. Tully."

“How d’y do?” “Amory,” said Alec exuberantly, “if you’ll jump in we’ll take you to some secluded nook and give you a wee jolt of bourbon.” Amory considered. “That’s an idea	"Hey, how's it going?" Alec said excitedly, "Amory, hop in, and we'll find a quiet spot and give you a little shot of bourbon." Amory thought about it. "That sounds good."

“Step in—move over, Jill, and Amory will smile very handsomely at you.” Amory squeezed into the back seat beside a gaudy, vermilion-lipped blonde. “Hello, Doug Fairbanks,” she said flippantly. “Walking for exercise or hunting for company?” “I was counting the waves,” replied Amory gravely	"Get in, Jill—scoot over, and Amory will give you his best smile." Amory squeezed into the back next to a blonde with bright red lipstick. "Hey, Doug Fairbanks," she said, acting cool. "Walking to get fit or looking for someone to hang out with?" "Just counting the waves," Amory answered seriously.

“I’m going in for statistics.” “Don’t kid me, Doug.” When they reached an unfrequented side street Alec stopped the car among deep shadows	"I'm going to study statistics." "You're joking, Doug." They found a quiet side street and Alec parked the car in the dark shadows.

“What you doing down here these cold days, Amory?” he demanded, as he produced a quart of bourbon from under the fur rug. Amory avoided the question. Indeed, he had had no definite reason for coming to the coast. “Do you remember that party of ours, sophomore year?” he asked instead	"What are you doing down here in this cold weather, Amory?" he asked, pulling a bottle of bourbon from under the blanket. Amory dodged the question. He didn't really have a good reason for coming to the coast. "Remember that party we had back in our second year of college?" he asked, changing the subject.

“Do I? When we slept in the pavilions up in Asbury Park—” “Lord, Alec! It’s hard to think that Jesse and Dick and Kerry are all three dead.” Alec shivered. “Don’t talk about it	"Really? Remember when we camped out in those tents at Asbury Park?" "Man, Alec! It's crazy to think Jesse, Dick, and Kerry are all gone." Alec shuddered. "Don't mention it."

These dreary fall days depress me enough.” Jill seemed to agree	"These gloomy autumn days are depressing enough for me." Jill seemed to agree.

“Doug here is sorta gloomy anyways,” she commented. “Tell him to drink deep—it’s good and scarce these days.” “What I really want to ask you, Amory, is where you are—” “Why, New York, I suppose—” “I mean tonight, because if you haven’t got a room yet you’d better help me out	"Doug's always a bit down," she said. "Tell him to enjoy his drink, there's not much to go around these days." "What I really want to know, Amory, is where you are right now..." "Oh, New York, I guess..." "I mean, tonight. If you don't have a place to stay, you should help me out."

“Glad to.” “You see, Tully and I have two rooms with bath between at the Ranier, and he’s got to go back to New York	"Sure thing." "So, Tully and I share two rooms with a bathroom in between at the Ranier hotel, and he has to go back to New York."

I don’t want to have to move. Question is, will you occupy one of the rooms?” Amory was willing, if he could get in right away	"I don't want to move. So, are you going to take one of the rooms?" Amory said he would, if he could move in immediately.

“You’ll find the key in the office; the rooms are in my name.” Declining further locomotion or further stimulation, Amory left the car and sauntered back along the board walk to the hotel	"The key's at the front desk; the rooms are under my name." Not wanting to walk or talk anymore, Amory got out of the car and strolled back to the hotel.

He was in an eddy again, a deep, lethargic gulf, without desire to work or write, love or dissipate. For the first time in his life he rather longed for death to roll over his generation, obliterating their petty fevers and struggles and exultations	He was stuck again, in a deep, lazy rut, not wanting to work, write, love, or even party. For the first time, he almost wished everyone would just die, wiping out all their silly worries, fights, and celebrations.

His youth seemed never so vanished as now in the contrast between the utter loneliness of this visit and that riotous, joyful party of four years before. Things that had been the merest commonplaces of his life then, deep sleep, the sense of beauty around him, all desire, had flown away and the gaps they left were filled only with the great listlessness of his disillusion	He'd never felt so old as he did now, comparing how lonely this trip was to that wild, happy party he had four years ago. Things that used to be normal for him back then – like sleeping well, noticing beauty, and wanting things – were all gone. Now, he just felt bored and disappointed.

“To hold a man a woman has to appeal to the worst in him.” This sentence was the thesis of most of his bad nights, of which he felt this was to be one	"To keep a man interested, a woman has to play to his dark side." He felt like this idea explained a lot of his crummy evenings, and tonight was shaping up to be another one.

His mind had already started to play variations on the subject. Tireless passion, fierce jealousy, longing to possess and crush—these alone were left of all his love for Rosalind; these remained to him as payment for the loss of his youth—bitter calomel under the thin sugar of love’s exaltation	He was already obsessing about her. All that was left of his love for Rosalind was endless desire, intense jealousy, and wanting to completely control her. He felt like these were the only things he got in return for losing his innocence: a nasty aftertaste hidden beneath the sweet, exciting feeling of being in love.

In his room he undressed and wrapping himself in blankets to keep out the chill October air drowsed in an armchair by the open window. He remembered a poem he had read months before: “Oh staunch old heart who toiled so long for me, I waste my years sailing along the sea—” Yet he had no sense of waste, no sense of the present hope that waste implied. He felt that life had rejected him	Back in his room, he took off his clothes. He wrapped himself in blankets to stay warm against the cold October air and dozed off in an armchair by the open window. He remembered a poem he'd read earlier: "Oh, my strong, loyal heart that worked so hard for me, I'm wasting my life just drifting along." But he didn't feel like he was wasting anything. He didn't even feel the hope that usually comes with realizing you're wasting time. He just felt like life had given up on him.

“Rosalind! Rosalind!” He poured the words softly into the half-darkness until she seemed to permeate the room; the wet salt breeze filled his hair with moisture, the rim of a moon seared the sky and made the curtains dim and ghostly. He fell asleep. When he awoke it was very late and quiet	"Rosalind! Rosalind!" He whispered her name in the dim light until it felt like she was everywhere. The damp, salty wind made his hair wet. A bright moon burned in the sky, making the curtains look faded and like ghosts. He fell asleep. When he woke up, it was very late and everything was quiet.

The blanket had slipped partly off his shoulders and he touched his skin to find it damp and cold. Then he became aware of a tense whispering not ten feet away. He became rigid	The blanket had slid off his shoulders a bit, and he felt his skin, noticing it was damp and cold. Then he heard someone whispering intensely nearby, maybe ten feet away. He froze.

“Don’t make a sound!” It was Alec’s voice. “Jill—do you hear me?” “Yes—” breathed very low, very frightened. They were in the bathroom. Then his ears caught a louder sound from somewhere along the corridor outside	"Quiet!" It was Alec. "Jill, can you hear me?" "Yes," she whispered, scared. They were in the bathroom. Then he heard something louder coming from the hallway outside.

It was a mumbling of men’s voices and a repeated muffled rapping. Amory threw off the blankets and moved close to the bathroom door. “My God!” came the girl’s voice again. “You’ll have to let them in	There was a low hum of men talking and a soft, constant knocking. Amory kicked off the covers and went to the bathroom door. "Oh my God!" the girl said again. "You have to let them in."

“Sh!” Suddenly a steady, insistent knocking began at Amory’s hall door and simultaneously out of the bathroom came Alec, followed by the vermilion-lipped girl. They were both clad in pajamas	"Sh!" All of a sudden, someone started knocking loudly and constantly on Amory's door. At the same time, Alec and the girl with bright red lipstick came out of the bathroom. They were both wearing pajamas.

“Amory!” an anxious whisper. “What’s the trouble?” “It’s house detectives. My God, Amory—they’re just looking for a test-case—” “Well, better let them in.” “You don’t understand	"Amory!" a worried whisper said. "What's wrong?" "It's hotel security. Man, Amory, they're just trying to find someone to make an example of." "Well, we should let them in then." "You don't get it."

They can get me under the Mann Act.” The girl followed him slowly, a rather miserable, pathetic figure in the darkness. Amory tried to plan quickly	"They could arrest me for taking her across state lines." The girl followed him, looking sad and lost in the dark. Amory tried to think fast.

“You make a racket and let them in your room,” he suggested anxiously, “and I’ll get her out by this door.” “They’re here too, though. They’ll watch this door	"You make some noise and let them into your room," he said, worried. "Then I'll sneak her out this way." "But they're here too. They'll be watching this door."

“Can’t you give a wrong name?” “No chance. I registered under my own name; besides, they’d trail the auto license number	"Can't you give a fake name?" "No way. I signed up with my real name. Plus, they'd track the car by its license plate."

“Say you’re married.” “Jill says one of the house detectives knows her	"Pretend you're married." "Jill says one of the hotel security guys recognizes her."

The girl had stolen to the bed and tumbled upon it; lay there listening wretchedly to the knocking which had grown gradually to a pounding. Then came a man’s voice, angry and imperative: “Open up or we’ll break the door in!” In the silence when this voice ceased Amory realized that there were other things in the room besides people. over and around the figure crouched on the bed there hung an aura, gossamer as a moonbeam, tainted as stale, weak wine, yet a horror, diffusively brooding already over the three of them	The girl had snuck into the bedroom and collapsed on the bed. She lay there, miserably listening to the knocking that had turned into loud banging. Then a man yelled, angry and demanding: "Open the door, or we'll smash it down!" When the voice stopped, Amory understood something else was in the room with them. Around the girl huddled on the bed, there was a feeling, delicate like moonlight but as unpleasant as old, watered-down wine, and it was a terrifying thing, already spreading over all three of them.

and over by the window among the stirring curtains stood something else, featureless and indistinguishable, yet strangely familiar. Simultaneously two great cases presented themselves side by side to Amory; all that took place in his mind, then, occupied in actual time less than ten seconds. The first fact that flashed radiantly on his comprehension was the great impersonality of sacrifice—he perceived that what we call love and hate, reward and punishment, had no more to do with it than the date of the month	Near the window, by the moving curtains, was something else. It was hard to make out, and didn't have any clear shape, but felt familiar. At the same time, two big ideas hit Amory. Everything he thought about next happened really fast, in less than ten seconds. The first thing he realized was that sacrifice doesn't care about who you are. He understood that things like love, hate, getting rewarded, or getting punished, had nothing to do with it, just like the day of the month doesn't matter.

He quickly recapitulated the story of a sacrifice he had heard of in college: a man had cheated in an examination; his roommate in a gust of sentiment had taken the entire blame—due to the shame of it the innocent one’s entire future seemed shrouded in regret and failure, capped by the ingratitude of the real culprit. He had finally taken his own life—years afterward the facts had come out	He quickly retold a story he'd heard in college about a sacrifice: A guy cheated on a test, and his roommate, acting on impulse, took the fall for him. Because of the embarrassment, the innocent roommate's life seemed ruined, full of regret and failure, made even worse by the cheater's lack of gratitude. Eventually, he killed himself. Years later, the truth came out.

At the time the story had both puzzled and worried Amory. Now he realized the truth; that sacrifice was no purchase of freedom. It was like a great elective office, it was like an inheritance of power—to certain people at certain times an essential luxury, carrying with it not a guarantee but a responsibility, not a security but an infinite risk	Back then, the story confused and bothered Amory. Now he understood: sacrificing something doesn't buy you freedom. It's like holding a powerful position, like inheriting authority – for some people at certain moments, it's a necessary privilege, but it comes with responsibility, not a sure thing, and a huge amount of risk.

Its very momentum might drag him down to ruin—the passing of the emotional wave that made it possible might leave the one who made it high and dry forever on an island of despair. Amory knew that afterward Alec would secretly hate him for having done so much for him. All this was flung before Amory like an opened scroll, while ulterior to him and speculating upon him were those two breathless, listening forces: the gossamer aura that hung over and about the girl and that familiar thing by the window	The excitement could destroy him. When the feeling that made it possible faded, he might be stranded, miserable, forever. Amory knew Alec would resent him for helping so much. All this flashed before Amory, while behind him, unseen, were two powerful, listening presences: the girl's delicate influence, and that other, more familiar feeling by the window.

Sacrifice by its very nature was arrogant and impersonal; sacrifice should be eternally supercilious. Weep not for me but for thy children. That—thought Amory—would be somehow the way God would talk to me	Sacrifice itself is kind of showy and cold. It should always act superior. Don't feel sorry for me, feel sorry for your own troubles. That's how God would probably talk to me, Amory thought.

Amory felt a sudden surge of joy and then like a face in a motion-picture the aura over the bed faded out; the dynamic shadow by the window, that was as near as he could name it, remained for the fraction of a moment and then the breeze seemed to lift it swiftly out of the room. He clinched his hands in quick ecstatic excitement. the ten seconds were up. “Do what I say, Alec—do what I say	Amory felt a rush of happiness, but then, like a movie scene disappearing, the special feeling in the room vanished. The strange, powerful presence by the window – that's the closest he could describe it – stayed for just a second, and then it seemed to get swept out of the room by the breeze. He clenched his fists, thrilled. Ten seconds were up. "Do what I tell you, Alec – do what I tell you!"

Do you understand?” Alec looked at him dumbly—his face a tableau of anguish. “You have a family,” continued Amory slowly. “You have a family and it’s important that you should get out of this. Do you hear me?” He repeated clearly what he had said	"Get it?" Alec just stared, his face a picture of pain. "You've got a family," Amory said slowly. "You need to get yourself out of this mess. Understand?" He repeated what he'd said, making sure Alec heard him.

“Do you hear me?” “I hear you.” The voice was curiously strained, the eyes never for a second left Amory’s	"You hear me?" "I hear you." The voice sounded weird, and the person kept staring at Amory.

“Alec, you’re going to lie down here. If anyone comes in you act drunk	Alec, lie down here. If someone comes in, pretend to be drunk.

You do what I say—if you don’t I’ll probably kill you.” There was another moment while they stared at each other. Then Amory went briskly to the bureau and, taking his pocketbook, beckoned peremptorily to the girl. He heard one word from Alec that sounded like “penitentiary,” then he and Jill were in the bathroom with the door bolted behind them	"Do what I tell you, or I might kill you." They stared at each other for a second. Then Amory quickly went to the dresser, grabbed his wallet, and urgently gestured for the girl to come. He heard Alec say something that sounded like "jail," then he and Jill were in the bathroom with the door locked.

“You’re here with me,” he said sternly. “You’ve been with me all evening.” She nodded, gave a little half cry	"You're here with me," he said, his voice hard. "You've been with me the whole night." She nodded and made a small, choked sound.

In a second he had the door of the other room open and three men entered. There was an immediate flood of electric light and he stood there blinking	Instantly, he opened the door to the next room, and three guys walked in. Bright electric lights flooded the space, and he squinted.

“You’ve been playing a little too dangerous a game, young man!” Amory laughed. “Well?” The leader of the trio nodded authoritatively at a burly man in a check suit	"You're playing a risky game, kid!" Amory laughed. "So?" The leader of the group nodded firmly at a big guy in a patterned suit.

“All right, Olson.” “I got you, Mr. O’May,” said Olson, nodding	"Okay, Olson." "Got it, Mr. O'May," Olson replied, nodding.

The other two took a curious glance at their quarry and then withdrew, closing the door angrily behind them. The burly man regarded Amory contemptuously	The other two looked at who they were after, then left, slamming the door. The big guy sized Amory up with disgust.

“Didn’t you ever hear of the Mann Act? Coming down here with her,” he indicated the girl with his thumb, “with a New York license on your car—to a hotel like this.” He shook his head implying that he had struggled over Amory but now gave him up. “Well,” said Amory rather impatiently, “what do you want us to do?” “Get dressed, quick—and tell your friend not to make such a racket	"You know about the Mann Act, right? Bringing her down here," he pointed to the girl with his thumb, "with New York plates on your car—to a place like this." He shook his head, like he'd tried to understand Amory but couldn't anymore. "Okay," Amory said, a little annoyed, "what do you want us to do?" "Get dressed, fast—and tell your friend to keep it down."

Jill was sobbing noisily on the bed, but at these words she subsided sulkily and, gathering up her clothes, retired to the bathroom. As Amory slipped into Alec’s B	Jill was crying loudly on the bed, but when she heard this, she stopped, looking annoyed. She grabbed her clothes and went to the bathroom. Amory then got into Alec's B

V.D.s he found that his attitude toward the situation was agreeably humorous	He thought it was funny how he felt about getting an STD.

The aggrieved virtue of the burly man made him want to laugh. “Anybody else here?” demanded Olson, trying to look keen and ferret-like. “Fellow who had the rooms,” said Amory carelessly	The big guy's offended innocence almost made him laugh. "Is anyone else here?" Olson asked, trying to look sharp and sneaky. "Just the guy who had these rooms," Amory said casually.

“He’s drunk as an owl, though. Been in there asleep since six o’clock.” “I’ll take a look at him presently	"He's really drunk. He's been asleep in there since six." "I'll check on him soon."

“How did you find out?” asked Amory curiously. “Night clerk saw you go upstairs with this woman.” Amory nodded; Jill reappeared from the bathroom, completely if rather untidily arrayed. “Now then,” began Olson, producing a notebook, “I want your real names—no damn John Smith or Mary Brown	"How did you find out?" Amory asked, interested. "The night clerk saw you go upstairs with this woman." Amory nodded. Jill came back from the bathroom, dressed, although a little messy. "Okay," Olson started, pulling out a notebook, "I need your real names. No fake ones like John Smith or Mary Brown."

“Wait a minute,” said Amory quietly. “Just drop that big-bully stuff. We merely got caught, that’s all	"Hold on," Amory said calmly. "Knock off the tough guy act. We just got busted, that's it."

Olson glared at him. “Name?” he snapped	Olson stared at him. "What's your name?" he asked sharply.

Amory gave his name and New York address. “And the lady?” “Miss Jill—” “Say,” cried Olson indignantly, “just ease up on the nursery rhymes. What’s your name? Sarah Murphy? Minnie Jackson?” “Oh, my God!” cried the girl cupping her tear-stained face in her hands. “I don’t want my mother to know	Amory told him his name and New York address. "And the lady?" "Miss Jill—" "Hey," Olson interrupted, annoyed, "cut the cute stuff. What's your name? Is it Sarah Murphy? Minnie Jackson?" "Oh, God!" the girl sobbed, hiding her face in her hands. "I don't want my mother to find out."

I don’t want my mother to know.” “Come on now!” “Shut up!” cried Amory at Olson	"I don't want my mom to find out." "Seriously?" "Be quiet!" Amory yelled at Olson.

An instant’s pause. “Stella Robbins,” she faltered finally. “General Delivery, Rugway, New Hampshire.” Olson snapped his notebook shut and looked at them very ponderously	She hesitated for a second. "Stella Robbins," she said, stumbling over the words. "General Delivery, Rugway, New Hampshire." Olson closed his notebook quickly and stared at them, looking very serious.

“By rights the hotel could turn the evidence over to the police and you’d go to penitentiary, you would, for bringin’ a girl from one State to ’nother f’r immoral purp’ses—” He paused to let the majesty of his words sink in. “But—the hotel is going to let you off.” “It doesn’t want to get in the papers,” cried Jill fiercely. “Let us off! Huh!” A great lightness surrounded Amory	"Technically, the hotel could give the evidence to the cops, and you'd go to prison for taking a girl across state lines for sex." He stopped, letting that sink in. "But—the hotel's going to let you go." "They don't want the publicity!" Jill snapped. "Let us go! Ha!" Amory felt a huge sense of relief.

He realized that he was safe and only then did he appreciate the full enormity of what he might have incurred. “However,” continued Olson, “there’s a protective association among the hotels	He understood he was okay, and only then did he really grasp how much trouble he could have been in. "Anyway," Olson went on, "the hotels have an understanding to protect each other."

There’s been too much of this stuff, and we got a ’rangement with the newspapers so that you get a little free publicity. Not the name of the hotel, but just a line sayin’ that you had a little trouble in ’lantic City. See?” “I see	"We've had too many incidents like this, so we made a deal with the newspapers. They'll give you a little free publicity. Not the hotel's name, just a short line saying you had some trouble in Atlantic City. Get it?" "I get it."

“You’re gettin’ off light—damn light—but—” “Come on,” said Amory briskly. “Let’s get out of here. We don’t need a valedictory	"You're getting away easy – way too easy – but..." "Come on," Amory said quickly. "Let's go. We don't need a goodbye speech."

Olson walked through the bathroom and took a cursory glance at Alec’s still form. Then he extinguished the lights and motioned them to follow him	Olson went through the bathroom, quickly looked at Alec who was still lying there, turned off the lights, and signaled for them to come with him.

As they walked into the elevator Amory considered a piece of bravado—yielded finally. He reached out and tapped Olson on the arm	As they got on the elevator, Amory thought about doing something bold, but eventually gave in. He reached out and touched Olson's arm.

“Would you mind taking off your hat? There’s a lady in the elevator.” Olson’s hat came off slowly. There was a rather embarrassing two minutes under the lights of the lobby while the night clerk and a few belated guests stared at them curiously; the loudly dressed girl with bent head, the handsome young man with his chin several points aloft; the inference was quite obvious. Then the chill outdoors—where the salt air was fresher and keener still with the first hints of morning	"Could you take your hat off? There's a woman in the elevator." Olson took his hat off slowly. They stood awkwardly in the lobby lights for a couple of minutes while the night clerk and some late guests stared at them. There was the girl with her head down, wearing flashy clothes, and the good-looking guy with his chin up high. It was pretty clear what people were thinking. Then, they went out into the cold air, where the salty breeze was even sharper with the first signs of morning.

“You can get one of those taxis and beat it,” said Olson, pointing to the blurred outline of two machines whose drivers were presumably asleep inside. “Goodbye,” said Olson	"Grab a cab and get out of here," Olson said, pointing to the hazy shapes of two taxis, probably with the drivers asleep inside. "Bye," Olson said.

He reached in his pocket suggestively, but Amory snorted, and, taking the girl’s arm, turned away. “Where did you tell the driver to go?” she asked as they whirled along the dim street. “The station.” “If that guy writes my mother—” “He won’t	He reached into his pocket, hinting at something, but Amory scoffed. He took the girl's arm and turned away. "Where did you tell the driver to go?" she asked as they sped down the dark street. "The train station." "If that guy writes my mother—" "He won't."

Nobody’ll ever know about this—except our friends and enemies.” Dawn was breaking over the sea	"No one will ever really know about this, except the people we're close to and the people who hate us." The sun was coming up over the ocean.

“It’s getting blue,” she said. “It does very well,” agreed Amory critically, and then as an afterthought: “It’s almost breakfast-time—do you want something to eat?” “Food—” she said with a cheerful laugh	"It's getting dark," she said. "It looks good," Amory said, judging it carefully. Then, after thinking for a second, "It's almost breakfast time. Want something to eat?" "Food!" she replied, laughing happily.

“Food is what queered the party. We ordered a big supper to be sent up to the room about two o’clock. Alec didn’t give the waiter a tip, so I guess the little bastard snitched	"The food ruined the party. We had a big meal ordered to our room around two. Alec didn't tip the waiter, so I think the jerk ratted us out."

Jill’s low spirits seemed to have gone faster than the scattering night. “Let me tell you,” she said emphatically, “when you want to stage that sorta party stay away from liquor, and when you want to get tight stay away from bedrooms.” “I’ll remember.” He tapped suddenly at the glass and they drew up at the door of an all-night restaurant	Jill seemed much happier now than she had been earlier. "Listen," she said, making her point, "if you're planning a party like that, don't serve alcohol. And if you want to get drunk, don't go near the bedrooms." "I will." He knocked on the taxi window, and they pulled up to a diner that was open all night.

“Is Alec a great friend of yours?” asked Jill as they perched themselves on high stools inside, and set their elbows on the dingy counter. “He used to be. He probably won’t want to be any more—and never understand why	"Is Alec a good friend of yours?" Jill asked, as they sat on tall stools inside and leaned on the dirty counter. "He used to be. He probably won't want to be anymore—and he'll never get why."

“It was sorta crazy you takin’ all that blame. Is he pretty important? Kinda more important than you are?” Amory laughed	"It was kind of nuts you taking all the blame. Is he really important? Like, more important than you?" Amory laughed.

“That remains to be seen,” he answered. “That’s the question.”	"We'll see," he said. "That's what we need to find out."

Two days later back in New York Amory found in a newspaper what he had been searching for—a dozen lines which announced to whom it might concern that Mr. Amory Blaine, who “gave his address” as, etc., had been requested to leave his hotel in Atlantic City because of entertaining in his room a lady not his wife. Then he started, and his fingers trembled, for directly above was a longer paragraph of which the first words were: “Mr. and Mrs. Leland R. Connage are announcing the engagement of their daughter, Rosalind, to Mr. J. Dawson Ryder, of Hartford, Connecticut—” He dropped the paper and lay down on his bed with a frightened, sinking sensation in the pit of his stomach	Two days later, back in New York, Amory found the newspaper article he'd been looking for. It was a short blurb saying that Amory Blaine, whose address was listed, had been asked to leave his Atlantic City hotel because he had a woman in his room who wasn't his wife. Then he saw something else and started shaking. Right above it was a longer announcement: "Mr. and Mrs. Leland R. Connage are happy to announce the engagement of their daughter, Rosalind, to Mr. J. Dawson Ryder, of Hartford, Connecticut—" He dropped the paper and felt a sick, scared feeling in his stomach.

She was gone, definitely, finally gone. Until now he had half unconsciously cherished the hope deep in his heart that some day she would need him and send for him, cry that it had been a mistake, that her heart ached only for the pain she had caused him. Never again could he find even the sombre luxury of wanting her—not this Rosalind, harder, older—nor any beaten, broken woman that his imagination brought to the door of his forties—Amory had wanted her youth, the fresh radiance of her mind and body, the stuff that she was selling now once and for all. So far as he was concerned, young Rosalind was dead	She was gone, for good. He'd secretly hoped she would need him someday, ask for him, say it was a mistake, and that she only hurt because she hurt him. He couldn't even enjoy wanting her anymore—not this tougher, older Rosalind, or any broken woman he might imagine when he was older. Amory loved her when she was young, her energy, how bright she was, inside and out, the things she was throwing away now. As far as he was concerned, the young Rosalind he loved was dead.

A day later came a crisp, terse letter from Mr. Barton in Chicago, which informed him that as three more streetcar companies had gone into the hands of receivers he could expect for the present no further remittances	The next day, Mr. Barton sent a short, direct letter from Chicago saying that since three more streetcar companies had gone bankrupt, Amory shouldn't expect any more money from him for now.

Last of all, on a dazed Sunday night, a telegram told him of Monsignor Darcy’s sudden death in Philadelphia five days before. He knew then what it was that he had perceived among the curtains of the room in Atlantic City	Finally, on a confused Sunday night, a telegram told him Monsignor Darcy had suddenly died in Philadelphia five days earlier. He then understood what he had sensed behind the curtains in the room in Atlantic City.

While the rain drizzled on Amory looked futilely back at the stream of his life, all its glitterings and dirty shallows. To begin with, he was still afraid—not physically afraid any more, but afraid of people and prejudice and misery and monotony. Yet, deep in his bitter heart, he wondered if he was after all worse than this man or the next. He knew that he could sophisticate himself finally into saying that his own weakness was just the result of circumstances and environment; that often when he raged at himself as an egotist something would whisper ingratiatingly: “No	As it rained, Amory looked back at his life, at all the good and bad parts. He was still scared – not physically, but of people's opinions, unfairness, sadness, and boredom. But deep down, he wondered if he was really any worse than anyone else. He knew he could easily convince himself that his flaws were just because of his situation and where he grew up. Often, when he was angry at himself for being selfish, something would whisper, trying to be nice, "No...

Genius!” That was one manifestation of fear, that voice which whispered that he could not be both great and good, that genius was the exact combination of those inexplicable grooves and twists in his mind, that any discipline would curb it to mediocrity. Probably more than any concrete vice or failing Amory despised his own personality—he loathed knowing that tomorrow and the thousand days after he would swell pompously at a compliment and sulk at an ill word like a third-rate musician or a first-class actor. He was ashamed of the fact that very simple and honest people usually distrusted him; that he had been cruel, often, to those who had sunk their personalities in him—several girls, and a man here and there through college, that he had been an evil influence on; people who had followed him here and there into mental adventures from which he alone rebounded unscathed. Usually, on nights like this, for there had been many lately, he could escape from this consuming introspection by thinking of children and the infinite possibilities of children—he leaned and listened and he heard a startled baby awake in a house across the street and lend a tiny whimper to the still night	"Brilliant!" That was just a way of hiding his fear. A voice inside him told him he couldn't be both a great person and a good person. He thought his unique brilliance came from the weird way his mind worked, and that any rules or self-control would make him average. More than any bad habit, Amory hated his own personality. He hated knowing he'd get puffed up by praise and sulk over insults, like a bad musician or an arrogant actor. He was ashamed that regular, honest people didn't usually trust him. He'd been mean, often, to people who'd given up their own lives for him—some girls, and a few guys in college. He'd been a bad influence, leading them into crazy ideas that he could handle, but they couldn't. Usually, on nights like this (and there had been a lot of them lately), he could stop thinking about himself by thinking about kids and how much potential they have. He leaned out and listened and heard a baby wake up in a house across the street, letting out a little cry into the quiet night.

Quick as a flash he turned away, wondering with a touch of panic whether something in the brooding despair of his mood had made a darkness in its tiny soul. He shivered	He suddenly looked away, a little scared that his own really sad and gloomy feelings might have somehow upset her. He shivered.

What if some day the balance was overturned, and he became a thing that frightened children and crept into rooms in the dark, approached dim communion with those phantoms who whispered shadowy secrets to the mad of that dark continent upon the moon. Amory smiled a bit	What if someday everything flipped, and he became someone who scared kids and sneaked around in the dark, almost connecting with those ghostly figures who whispered secret, crazy stuff to the lunatics on the moon? Amory smiled slightly.

“You’re too much wrapped up in yourself,” he heard someone say. And again— “Get out and do some real work—” “Stop worrying—” He fancied a possible future comment of his own	He heard someone say, "You're too self-absorbed." Then again, "Get out there and do something meaningful!" "Stop stressing!" He imagined himself possibly saying something like that in the future.

“Yes—I was perhaps an egotist in youth, but I soon found it made me morbid to think too much about myself.” Suddenly he felt an overwhelming desire to let himself go to the devil—not to go violently as a gentleman should, but to sink safely and sensuously out of sight. He pictured himself in an adobe house in Mexico, half-reclining on a rug-covered couch, his slender, artistic fingers closed on a cigarette while he listened to guitars strumming melancholy undertones to an age-old dirge of Castile and an olive-skinned, carmine-lipped girl caressed his hair	"Yeah, I was probably a self-centered kid, but I realized thinking about myself all the time just made me depressed." He suddenly wanted to just give up and go wild – not in a dramatic, proper way, but to fade away peacefully and pleasurably. He imagined himself in a Mexican house, lounging on a rug-covered couch, holding a cigarette with his elegant hands, listening to guitars playing sad, old Spanish songs while a dark-haired, red-lipped girl stroked his hair.

Here he might live a strange litany, delivered from right and wrong and from the hound of heaven and from every God (except the exotic Mexican one who was pretty slack himself and rather addicted to Oriental scents)—delivered from success and hope and poverty into that long chute of indulgence which led, after all, only to the artificial lake of death. There were so many places where one might deteriorate pleasantly: Port Said, Shanghai, parts of Turkestan, Constantinople, the South Seas—all lands of sad, haunting music and many odors, where lust could be a mode and expression of life, where the shades of night skies and sunsets would seem to reflect only moods of passion: the colors of lips and poppies.	He could live a weird, repetitive life, free from worrying about good and bad, religion, or any God (except maybe that laid-back Mexican one who liked incense). He'd be free from pressure to succeed, hopes, or being poor, and slide down a long path of doing whatever he wanted, which would eventually lead to a pointless death. There were tons of places where you could go downhill in a fun way: places like Port Said, Shanghai, parts of Central Asia, Istanbul, the South Seas—all places with sad, beautiful music and interesting smells, where sex was just part of life, and where the night skies and sunsets seemed to only reflect strong emotions, like the color of lips and red flowers.

Once he had been miraculously able to scent evil as a horse detects a broken bridge at night, but the man with the queer feet in Phoebe’s room had diminished to the aura over Jill. His instinct perceived the fetidness of poverty, but no longer ferreted out the deeper evils in pride and sensuality. There were no more wise men; there were no more heroes; Burne Holiday was sunk from sight as though he had never lived; Monsignor was dead	He used to be amazing at sensing bad things, like a horse knows a bridge is broken in the dark. But now, the creepy guy in Phoebe's room was just a faint reminder in Jill. He could still smell the stink of being poor, but he couldn't find the worse kinds of bad stuff, like pride and being overly sexual. There weren't any smart, insightful people left. There weren't any heroes. Burne Holiday was forgotten, like he never existed. Monsignor was dead.

Amory had grown up to a thousand books, a thousand lies; he had listened eagerly to people who pretended to know, who knew nothing. The mystical reveries of saints that had once filled him with awe in the still hours of night, now vaguely repelled him. The Byrons and Brookes who had defied life from mountain tops were in the end but flaneurs and poseurs, at best mistaking the shadow of courage for the substance of wisdom	Amory had read a ton of books and been told a ton of lies. He'd really listened to people who acted like they were experts, even though they knew nothing. He used to be amazed by the spiritual dreams of saints late at night, but now they kind of disgusted him. Guys like Byron and Brooke, who seemed to challenge life from up high, were really just show-offs and posers, confusing looking brave with actually being wise.

The pageantry of his disillusion took shape in a world-old procession of Prophets, Athenians, Martyrs, Saints, Scientists, Don Juans, Jesuits, Puritans, Fausts, Poets, Pacifists; like costumed alumni at a college reunion they streamed before him as their dreams, personalities, and creeds had in turn thrown colored lights on his soul; each had tried to express the glory of life and the tremendous significance of man; each had boasted of synchronizing what had gone before into his own rickety generalities; each had depended after all on the set stage and the convention of the theatre, which is that man in his hunger for faith will feed his mind with the nearest and most convenient food. Women—of whom he had expected so much; whose beauty he had hoped to transmute into modes of art; whose unfathomable instincts, marvellously incoherent and inarticulate, he had thought to perpetuate in terms of experience—had become merely consecrations to their own posterity. Isabelle, Clara, Rosalind, Eleanor, were all removed by their very beauty, around which men had swarmed, from the possibility of contributing anything but a sick heart and a page of puzzled words to write. Amory based his loss of faith in help from others on several sweeping syllogisms	His disappointment played out like a grand, ancient parade. He imagined figures from history: religious leaders, thinkers from Athens, people who died for their beliefs, holy figures, scientists, famous lovers, members of the Jesuit order, strict Puritans, characters like Faust, poets, and peace activists. They were like alumni at a college reunion, each dressed in their historical roles. Their dreams, personalities, and beliefs had influenced him, each shining a different light on his soul. Each of them had tried to show the beauty and importance of life. Each claimed to bring together the wisdom of the past into their own shaky ideas. But in the end, they all relied on a fixed script and the way theater works: that people, wanting to believe in something, will grab onto whatever’s easiest and most available. He'd expected so much from women, hoping to turn their beauty into art and capture their mysterious, confusing, and unspoken feelings through his own experiences. But they'd become focused only on having children. Women like Isabelle, Clara, Rosalind, and Eleanor, because of their beauty and the attention it drew, couldn't offer anything more than sadness and confusing things to write about. Amory explained his loss of faith in others using a few broad generalizations.

Granted that his generation, however bruised and decimated from this Victorian war, were the heirs of progress. Waving aside petty differences of conclusions which, although they might occasionally cause the deaths of several millions of young men, might be explained away—supposing that after all Bernard Shaw and Bernhardi, Bonar Law and Bethmann-Hollweg were mutual heirs of progress if only in agreeing against the ducking of witches—waiving the antitheses and approaching individually these men who seemed to be the leaders, he was repelled by the discrepancies and contradictions in the men themselves	Even though his generation was damaged by World War I, they still thought they were making progress. Ignoring minor disagreements that, despite causing millions of deaths, could be excused, and assuming that people like Shaw, Bernhardi, Law, and Bethmann-Hollweg were all progressing, at least in agreeing not to drown witches, he bypassed these opposing views. When he looked at these leaders as individuals, he was turned off by their flaws and inconsistencies.

There was, for example, Thornton Hancock, respected by half the intellectual world as an authority on life, a man who had verified and believed the code he lived by, an educator of educators, an adviser to Presidents—yet Amory knew that this man had, in his heart, leaned on the priest of another religion. And Monsignor, upon whom a cardinal rested, had moments of strange and horrible insecurity—inexplicable in a religion that explained even disbelief in terms of its own faith: if you doubted the devil it was the devil that made you doubt him. Amory had seen Monsignor go to the houses of stolid philistines, read popular novels furiously, saturate himself in routine, to escape from that horror	Like, take Thornton Hancock. Half the smart people thought he was a life expert, a guy who actually lived by his own rules and believed in them. He taught teachers and even advised Presidents. But Amory knew that deep down, Hancock secretly relied on faith, just from a different religion. And even the Monsignor, who was super important in the church, had times when he felt totally insecure and freaked out. That didn't make sense, because their religion was supposed to explain everything, even when you didn't believe. Like, if you doubted the devil, it was just the devil messing with you. Amory saw the Monsignor go hang out with boring, regular people, read trashy novels like crazy, and get stuck in a boring routine just to escape that awful feeling.

And this priest, a little wiser, somewhat purer, had been, Amory knew, not essentially older than he. Amory was alone—he had escaped from a small enclosure into a great labyrinth	This priest, a bit wiser and purer, wasn't that much older than Amory. Amory felt alone—he'd gotten out of a small, trapped space and into a huge maze.

He was where Goethe was when he began Faust; he was where Conrad was when he wrote Almayer’s Folly. Amory said to himself that there were essentially two sorts of people who through natural clarity or disillusion left the enclosure and sought the labyrinth. There were men like Wells and Plato, who had, half unconsciously, a strange, hidden orthodoxy, who would accept for themselves only what could be accepted for all men—incurable romanticists who never, for all their efforts, could enter the labyrinth as stark souls; there were on the other hand sword-like pioneering personalities, Samuel Butler, Renan, Voltaire, who progressed much slower, yet eventually much further, not in the direct pessimistic line of speculative philosophy but concerned in the eternal attempt to attach a positive value to life. Amory stopped	He felt like Goethe when he started "Faust," or Conrad when he wrote "Almayer's Folly." Amory thought there were two main types of people who, because they were clear-thinking or disappointed, left the safe and familiar and went looking for something more complex. Some, like Wells and Plato, had a kind of built-in, almost unconscious belief system. They only wanted what everyone could have. They were hopeless romantics who could never truly face the confusing world alone. Then there were others, like Samuel Butler, Renan, and Voltaire, who were like swords, cutting a new path. They moved slower but went further, not just following depressing philosophy, but always trying to find real value in life. Amory paused.

He began for the first time in his life to have a strong distrust of all generalities and epigrams. They were too easy, too dangerous to the public mind. Yet all thought usually reached the public after thirty years in some such form: Benson and Chesterton had popularized Huysmans and Newman; Shaw had sugarcoated Nietzsche and Ibsen and Schopenhauer	He started to really doubt big ideas and catchy sayings for the first time. They seemed too simple and could easily mislead people. But, it seemed like most complex ideas only became popular after about thirty years, and usually in a simplified form. Like, Benson and Chesterton made writers like Huysmans and Newman famous, and Shaw made thinkers like Nietzsche, Ibsen, and Schopenhauer easier to understand.

The man in the street heard the conclusions of dead genius through someone else’s clever paradoxes and didactic epigrams. Life was a damned muddle	Regular people heard about the ideas of brilliant thinkers who were long gone, but only through catchy and easy-to-remember sayings made up by other, less brilliant people. Life was a confusing mess.

a football game with everyone offside and the referee gotten rid of—everyone claiming the referee would have been on his side. Progress was a labyrinth	It was like a football game where everyone was cheating and the ref was gone. Everyone thought the ref would have favored them anyway. Moving forward felt impossible.

people plunging blindly in and then rushing wildly back, shouting that they had found it. the invisible king—the élan vital—the principle of evolution. writing a book, starting a war, founding a school	People diving headfirst into something, then quickly retreating, claiming they'd figured it all out. Like, the secret to everything – that special spark, the whole reason we evolve. So they write a book, start a war, or create a new school.

Amory, even had he not been a selfish man, would have started all inquiries with himself. He was his own best example—sitting in the rain, a human creature of sex and pride, foiled by chance and his own temperament of the balm of love and children, preserved to help in building up the living consciousness of the race	Amory, even if he weren't self-centered, would have looked at himself first. He was his own best case study—stuck in a bad spot, a person driven by desire and ego, messed up by bad luck and his own personality, kept from the comfort of love and family, but still around to help society understand itself better.

In self-reproach and loneliness and disillusion he came to the entrance of the labyrinth. Another dawn flung itself across the river, a belated taxi hurried along the street, its lamps still shining like burning eyes in a face white from a night’s carouse. A melancholy siren sounded far down the river	Feeling guilty, lonely, and let down, he reached a turning point. Another dawn broke over the river. A taxi rushed by, late as usual, its headlights like tired, red eyes after a long night of partying. A sad siren wailed in the distance.

Amory kept thinking how Monsignor would have enjoyed his own funeral. It was magnificently Catholic and liturgical	Amory thought the Monsignor would have loved his own funeral. It was a really impressive, traditional Catholic service.

Bishop O’Neill sang solemn high mass and the cardinal gave the final absolutions. Thornton Hancock, Mrs. Lawrence, the British and Italian ambassadors, the papal delegate, and a host of friends and priests were there—yet the inexorable shears had cut through all these threads that Monsignor had gathered into his hands.	Bishop O'Neill did the fancy church service, and the cardinal gave the final blessings. Thornton Hancock, Mrs. Lawrence, the British and Italian ambassadors, the Pope's representative, and tons of friends and priests were there. But death had cut through all the connections that the Monsignor had made in his life.

To Amory it was a haunting grief to see him lying in his coffin, with closed hands upon his purple vestments. His face had not changed, and, as he never knew he was dying, it showed no pain or fear. It was Amory’s dear old friend, his and the others’—for the church was full of people with daft, staring faces, the most exalted seeming the most stricken	Seeing him in the coffin was really sad for Amory. His hands were folded on his purple robe. He looked the same, and because he didn't know he was going to die, his face looked peaceful. He was Amory's good old friend, and everyone else's too—the church was packed with people looking lost and stunned. The most important people seemed the most upset.

The cardinal, like an archangel in cope and mitre, sprinkled the holy water; the organ broke into sound; the choir began to sing the “Requiem Eternam.” All these people grieved because they had to some extent depended upon Monsignor. Their grief was more than sentiment for the “crack in his voice or a certain break in his walk,” as Wells put it. These people had leaned on Monsignor’s faith, his way of finding cheer, of making religion a thing of lights and shadows, making all light and shadow merely aspects of God	The priest, looking like a fancy angel in his robes, sprinkled holy water. The organ music swelled, and the choir started singing the "Eternal Rest" prayer. All these people were sad because they had relied on Monsignor in some way. Their sadness was more than just missing "his raspy voice or the way he walked," like Wells would say. They had depended on Monsignor's strong belief, his ability to find happiness, and how he made religion feel alive with both beauty and mystery, seeing both as just different sides of God.

People felt safe when he was near. Of Amory’s attempted sacrifice had been born merely the full realization of his disillusion, but of Monsignor’s funeral was born the romantic elf who was to enter the labyrinth with him	People felt secure around him. Amory's failed attempt at self-sacrifice only made him more aware of how disappointed he was, but the Monsignor's funeral created the idealistic side of him that would face life's challenges with him.

He found something that he wanted, had always wanted and always would want—not to be admired, as he had feared; not to be loved, as he had made himself believe; but to be necessary to people, to be indispensable; he remembered the sense of security he had found in Burne. Life opened up in one of its amazing bursts of radiance and Amory suddenly and permanently rejected an old epigram that had been playing listlessly in his mind: “Very few things matter and nothing matters very much	He realized what he truly wanted, what he'd always wanted and always would: not to be liked or loved, but to be needed, to be essential to others. He remembered feeling safe and secure with Burne. It was like a sudden, amazing burst of light, and Amory completely dropped an old thought he used to have: "Almost nothing is important, and even that doesn't matter much."

On the contrary, Amory felt an immense desire to give people a sense of security.	Actually, Amory really wanted to make people feel safe and secure.

On the day that Amory started on his walk to Princeton the sky was a colorless vault, cool, high and barren of the threat of rain. It was a gray day, that least fleshly of all weathers; a day of dreams and far hopes and clear visions. It was a day easily associated with those abstract truths and purities that dissolve in the sunshine or fade out in mocking laughter by the light of the moon	The day Amory began walking to Princeton, the sky was a pale dome, cool, high, and with no sign of rain. It was a gray day, the least sensual kind of weather; a day for dreaming, big hopes, and seeing things clearly. It was a day that easily brought to mind those pure and abstract ideas that disappear in the sun or get laughed at in the moonlight.

The trees and clouds were carved in classical severity; the sounds of the countryside had harmonized to a monotone, metallic as a trumpet, breathless as the Grecian urn. The day had put Amory in such a contemplative mood that he caused much annoyance to several motorists who were forced to slow up considerably or else run him down	The trees and clouds looked sharply defined, like something from ancient art. The country sounds blended into one steady, high-pitched noise, like a trumpet, but still and quiet, like an old Greek vase. Amory was so lost in thought that he irritated some drivers, who had to slow down a lot to avoid hitting him.

So engrossed in his thoughts was he that he was scarcely surprised at that strange phenomenon—cordiality manifested within fifty miles of Manhattan—when a passing car slowed down beside him and a voice hailed him. He looked up and saw a magnificent Locomobile in which sat two middle-aged men, one of them small and anxious looking, apparently an artificial growth on the other who was large and begoggled and imposing. “Do you want a lift?” asked the apparently artificial growth, glancing from the corner of his eye at the imposing man as if for some habitual, silent corroboration. “You bet I do	He was so lost in thought that he wasn't even that surprised by the rare sight of friendly people so close to New York City. A car pulled up next to him and someone called out. He looked up and saw a fancy car with two middle-aged men inside. One was small and nervous-looking, like he was attached to the other man, who was big, wearing goggles, and looked important. The nervous man asked, glancing at the big man like he needed his approval, "Need a ride?" "Definitely!"

Thanks.” The chauffeur swung open the door, and, climbing in, Amory settled himself in the middle of the back seat. He took in his companions curiously	"Thanks." The driver opened the door, and Amory got in, sitting in the middle of the back seat. He looked at the other people in the car, interested.

The chief characteristic of the big man seemed to be a great confidence in himself set off against a tremendous boredom with everything around him. That part of his face which protruded under the goggles was what is generally termed “strong”; rolls of not undignified fat had collected near his chin; somewhere above was a wide thin mouth and the rough model for a Roman nose, and, below, his shoulders collapsed without a struggle into the powerful bulk of his chest and belly. He was excellently and quietly dressed. Amory noticed that he was inclined to stare straight at the back of the chauffeur’s head as if speculating steadily but hopelessly some baffling hirsute problem	The most noticeable thing about the big guy was that he was really confident but also totally bored with everything. The part of his face you could see under his goggles looked "strong," like people say. He had some not-unattractive fat around his chin. Up higher was a wide, thin mouth and the beginnings of a Roman nose. His shoulders sloped down easily into his big chest and stomach. He was dressed well, but quietly. Amory saw him staring intently at the back of the driver's head, like he was trying to figure out some impossible hair puzzle, but without much hope.

The smaller man was remarkable only for his complete submersion in the personality of the other. He was of that lower secretarial type who at forty have engraved upon their business cards: “Assistant to the President,” and without a sigh consecrate the rest of their lives to secondhand mannerisms. “Going far?” asked the smaller man in a pleasant disinterested way	The shorter guy was only noticeable because he totally copied the other man's personality. He was the type of low-level secretary who, around forty, gets "Assistant to the President" printed on his business card and then spends the rest of his life imitating his boss without complaint. "Traveling far?" the shorter guy asked casually, without really caring.

“Quite a stretch.” “Hiking for exercise?” “No,” responded Amory succinctly, “I’m walking because I can’t afford to ride.” “Oh	"That's a long walk." "Getting exercise?" "Nope," Amory said briefly, "I'm walking 'cause I'm broke." "Oh."

Then again: “Are you looking for work? Because there’s lots of work,” he continued rather testily. “All this talk of lack of work. The West is especially short of labor	Or, another thing: "Are you trying to find a job? Because there are tons of jobs," he said, sounding annoyed. "All this complaining about no work. The West really needs people."

He expressed the West with a sweeping, lateral gesture. Amory nodded politely. “Have you a trade?” No—Amory had no trade. “Clerk, eh?” No—Amory was not a clerk	He gestured broadly to indicate the West. Amory nodded. "Do you have a job?" No, Amory didn't have a job. "Maybe an office worker?" No, Amory wasn't an office worker.

“Whatever your line is,” said the little man, seeming to agree wisely with something Amory had said, “now is the time of opportunity and business openings.” He glanced again toward the big man, as a lawyer grilling a witness glances involuntarily at the jury	"Whatever you're into," the little man said, like he understood something Amory had said, "this is a great time for chances and new businesses." He looked at the big man again, kind of like a lawyer questioning someone in court might glance at the jury without thinking.

Amory decided that he must say something and for the life of him could think of only one thing to say. “Of course I want a great lot of money—” The little man laughed mirthlessly but conscientiously. “That’s what everyone wants nowadays, but they don’t want to work for it.” “A very natural, healthy desire	Amory knew he had to say something, but the only thing that came to mind was, "Of course I want a ton of money." The short guy gave a dry, humorless laugh, like he was supposed to. "That's what everyone wants now, but nobody wants to actually earn it." "Yeah, wanting it is normal and fine."

Almost all normal people want to be rich without great effort—except the financiers in problem plays, who want to ‘crash their way through.’ Don’t you want easy money?” “Of course not,” said the secretary indignantly. “But,” continued Amory disregarding him, “being very poor at present I am contemplating socialism as possibly my forte.” Both men glanced at him curiously	Most regular people want to get rich quick, without working too hard. The only exception is the greedy business guys you see in dramas, who just want to bulldoze their way to the top. Don't you want easy money?" "Of course not!" the secretary said, offended. "But," Amory went on, ignoring him, "since I'm broke right now, I'm thinking maybe socialism is the answer for me." They both looked at him, confused.

“These bomb throwers—” The little man ceased as words lurched ponderously from the big man’s chest. “If I thought you were a bomb thrower I’d run you over to the Newark jail. That’s what I think of Socialists.” Amory laughed	"These troublemakers—" The little guy stopped when the big guy started talking in a slow, heavy voice. "If I thought you were a troublemaker, I'd take you to jail in Newark. That's what I think of Socialists." Amory laughed.

“What are you,” asked the big man, “one of these parlor Bolsheviks, one of these idealists? I must say I fail to see the difference. The idealists loaf around and write the stuff that stirs up the poor immigrants.” “Well,” said Amory, “if being an idealist is both safe and lucrative, I might try it	The big guy asked, "So, what are you? One of those fake-radical types, all talk and no action? Or just an idealist? Honestly, I don't see a difference. Idealists just hang out and write stuff that gets poor immigrants all worked up." Amory replied, "Well, if being an idealist is easy and pays well, I might give it a shot."

“What’s your difficulty? Lost your job?” “Not exactly, but—well, call it that.” “What was it?” “Writing copy for an advertising agency	"What's wrong? Did you lose your job?" "Not really, but... yeah, you could say that." "What did you do?" "I wrote ads for an ad agency."

“Lots of money in advertising.” Amory smiled discreetly	"There's good money to be made in advertising." Amory smiled, trying not to show how pleased he was.

“Oh, I’ll admit there’s money in it eventually. Talent doesn’t starve any more. Even art gets enough to eat these days	"Okay, I agree, you can make money doing it eventually. Talented people don't have to struggle so much anymore. Even artists can make a decent living now."

Artists draw your magazine covers, write your advertisements, hash out ragtime for your theatres. By the great commercializing of printing you’ve found a harmless, polite occupation for every genius who might have carved his own niche	Artists create your magazine covers, write your ads, and play ragtime music in your theaters. Thanks to the mass production of printed materials, you've discovered a safe, socially acceptable way to use the talents of potentially groundbreaking individuals.

But beware the artist who’s an intellectual also. The artist who doesn’t fit—the Rousseau, the Tolstoy, the Samuel Butler, the Amory Blaine—” “Who’s he?” demanded the little man suspiciously. “Well,” said Amory, “he’s a—he’s an intellectual personage not very well known at present.” The little man laughed his conscientious laugh, and stopped rather suddenly as Amory’s burning eyes turned on him	But watch out for artists who are also intellectuals. The artist who's an outsider - like Rousseau, Tolstoy, Samuel Butler, or even Amory Blaine..." "Who's *he*?" the little man asked, sounding doubtful. "Well," Amory said, "he's... an intellectual type who isn't famous yet." The little man chuckled politely, then stopped abruptly when Amory stared intensely at him.

“What are you laughing at?” “These intellectual people—” “Do you know what it means?” The little man’s eyes twitched nervously. “Why, it usually means—” “It always means brainy and well-educated,” interrupted Amory. “It means having an active knowledge of the race’s experience.” Amory decided to be very rude	"What's so funny?" "These smart people..." "Do you even know what 'intellectual' means?" The short guy's eyes jumped around. "Well, it usually means..." "It just means smart and educated," Amory cut in. "It means you really know a lot about what people have learned over time." Amory decided to be a jerk.

He turned to the big man. “The young man,” he indicated the secretary with his thumb, and said young man as one says bellboy, with no implication of youth, “has the usual muddled connotation of all popular words	He looked at the big guy. "This guy," he gestured towards the secretary, using "guy" like you'd say "waiter," not meaning he's actually young, "is confused by what popular words usually mean."

“You object to the fact that capital controls printing?” said the big man, fixing him with his goggles. “Yes—and I object to doing their mental work for them	"You don't like that money influences what gets published?" the big guy said, staring at him through his goggles. "Right—and I don't want to have to think for them either."

It seemed to me that the root of all the business I saw around me consisted in overworking and underpaying a bunch of dubs who submitted to it.” “Here now,” said the big man, “you’ll have to admit that the laboring man is certainly highly paid—five and six hour days—it’s ridiculous. You can’t buy an honest day’s work from a man in the trades-unions.” “You’ve brought it on yourselves,” insisted Amory	"It looked to me like all the problems in the world come from companies working people too hard and paying them too little, and those people just take it." "Hold on," the big guy said, "you have to admit that workers are getting paid way too much these days– working only five or six hours a day! It's crazy. You can't get someone in a union to do an honest day's work." "You guys caused this problem yourselves," Amory argued.

“You people never make concessions until they’re wrung out of you.” “What people?” “Your class; the class I belonged to until recently; those who by inheritance or industry or brains or dishonesty have become the moneyed class	"You guys never give in until you're forced to." "What guys?" "Your group; the group I used to be in; the people who have money because of what they inherited, or how hard they worked, or how smart they are, or how dishonest they've been."

“Do you imagine that if that road-mender over there had the money he’d be any more willing to give it up?” “No, but what’s that got to do with it?” The older man considered. “No, I’ll admit it hasn’t	"Do you think that guy fixing the road would be any more likely to give up his money if he had a lot?" "No, but what does that have to do with anything?" The older man thought about it. "Okay, I guess it doesn't."

It rather sounds as if it had though.” “In fact,” continued Amory, “he’d be worse. The lower classes are narrower, less pleasant and personally more selfish—certainly more stupid	It sounds like he did, though." "Actually," Amory went on, "he'd be even worse. Poorer people are more close-minded, less nice, and more selfish – definitely dumber.

But all that has nothing to do with the question.” “Just exactly what is the question?” Here Amory had to pause to consider exactly what the question was	"But that's not the point." "Okay, what exactly *is* the point?" Here, Amory had to stop and figure out what the real question was.

“When life gets hold of a brainy man of fair education,” began Amory slowly, “that is, when he marries he becomes, nine times out of ten, a conservative as far as existing social conditions are concerned. He may be unselfish, kindhearted, even just in his own way, but his first job is to provide and to hold fast. His wife shoos him on, from ten thousand a year to twenty thousand a year, on and on, in an enclosed treadmill that hasn’t any windows	"When a smart, educated guy settles down," Amory started, "meaning when he gets married, he almost always becomes a conservative when it comes to society. He might be a good person, generous and fair, but his main focus is taking care of his family and keeping things stable. His wife pushes him to earn more and more, from ten grand a year to twenty, stuck in a never-ending cycle with no way out."

He’s done! Life’s got him! He’s no help! He’s a spiritually married man.” Amory paused and decided that it wasn’t such a bad phrase. “Some men,” he continued, “escape the grip	He's finished! Life beat him! He can't help! He's like, spiritually married." Amory stopped, thinking the phrase wasn't too bad. "Some guys," he went on, "get away."

Maybe their wives have no social ambitions; maybe they’ve hit a sentence or two in a ‘dangerous book’ that pleased them; maybe they started on the treadmill as I did and were knocked off. Anyway, they’re the congressmen you can’t bribe, the Presidents who aren’t politicians, the writers, speakers, scientists, statesmen who aren’t just popular grab-bags for a half-dozen women and children.” “He’s the natural radical?” “Yes,” said Amory	Maybe their wives don't care about climbing the social ladder. Maybe they read something cool in a controversial book that resonated with them. Or maybe they started trying to conform like I did and then gave up. Either way, they're the politicians you can't buy off, the leaders who aren't typical politicians, the authors, speakers, scientists, and leaders who aren't just in it for the fame and fortune to support a bunch of dependents." "So, he's a born rebel?" "Yes," Amory said.

“He may vary from the disillusioned critic like old Thornton Hancock, all the way to Trotsky. Now this spiritually unmarried man hasn’t direct power, for unfortunately the spiritually married man, as a byproduct of his money chase, has garnered in the great newspaper, the popular magazine, the influential weekly—so that Mrs. Newspaper, Mrs. Magazine, Mrs. Weekly can have a better limousine than those oil people across the street or those cement people ’round the corner.” “Why not?” “It makes wealthy men the keepers of the world’s intellectual conscience and, of course, a man who has money under one set of social institutions quite naturally can’t risk his family’s happiness by letting the clamor for another appear in his newspaper.” “But it appears,” said the big man. “Where?—in the discredited mediums	"He could be anywhere from a cynical guy like Thornton Hancock to someone like Trotsky. Now, this independent guy doesn't have real power. Sadly, guys who are tied down – because they’re busy chasing money – control the big newspapers, magazines, and influential online publications. Their wives want nicer cars than the rich folks down the street." "So what?" "It means rich guys are in charge of what the world thinks is right and wrong. Someone with money isn't going to risk his family’s comfort by letting his newspaper support a different way of doing things." "But those ideas still get out there," the big man said. "Where? Only in places nobody trusts."

Rotten cheap-papered weeklies.” “All right—go on.” “Well, my first point is that through a mixture of conditions of which the family is the first, there are these two sorts of brains. One sort takes human nature as it finds it, uses its timidity, its weakness, and its strength for its own ends	Lousy, trashy magazines." "Okay, keep going." "Well, first, because of different things, especially family, there are two kinds of minds. One type accepts people as they are, using their fears, weaknesses, and strengths to get what they want."

Opposed is the man who, being spiritually unmarried, continually seeks for new systems that will control or counteract human nature. His problem is harder. It is not life that’s complicated, it’s the struggle to guide and control life	On the other hand, you have the guy who isn't settled spiritually. He's always looking for new rules to control or change people. He's got a tougher challenge. Life isn't the problem, it's trying to manage and direct it.

That is his struggle. He is a part of progress—the spiritually married man is not.” The big man produced three big cigars, and proffered them on his huge palm. The little man took one, Amory shook his head and reached for a cigarette	"That's what he's dealing with. He's moving forward with the times, but a guy tied down by traditional values isn't." The big guy pulled out three big cigars and offered them on his open hand. The little guy took one. Amory declined and grabbed a cigarette.

“Go on talking,” said the big man. “I’ve been wanting to hear one of you fellows.”	"Keep talking," the big guy said. "I've been wanting to listen to what you people have to say."

“Modern life,” began Amory again, “changes no longer century by century, but year by year, ten times faster than it ever has before—populations doubling, civilizations unified more closely with other civilizations, economic interdependence, racial questions, and—we’re dawdling along. My idea is that we’ve got to go very much faster.” He slightly emphasized the last words and the chauffeur unconsciously increased the speed of the car. Amory and the big man laughed; the little man laughed, too, after a pause	Amory started talking again: "Life today is changing super fast, not like it used to. It's changing every year, way faster than ever before. More people, countries getting closer, money connecting everyone, race issues, and we're just hanging back. We need to speed things up!" He said that last part like he meant it, and the driver actually drove faster. Amory and the other guy laughed. The little man laughed a bit later.

“Every child,” said Amory, “should have an equal start. If his father can endow him with a good physique and his mother with some common sense in his early education, that should be his heritage. If the father can’t give him a good physique, if the mother has spent in chasing men the years in which she should have been preparing herself to educate her children, so much the worse for the child	Amory said, "Every kid should have the same chance at the beginning. If their dad can give them a healthy body and their mom can teach them some basic smarts when they're young, that's what they should get. If the dad isn't healthy or the mom wasted her time chasing guys instead of getting ready to teach her kids, then that's too bad for the kid."

He shouldn’t be artificially bolstered up with money, sent to these horrible tutoring schools, dragged through college. Every boy ought to have an equal start	He shouldn't be propped up with money, forced into those awful tutoring programs, or pushed through college. Every kid should have a fair shot from the beginning.

“All right,” said the big man, his goggles indicating neither approval nor objection. “Next I’d have a fair trial of government ownership of all industries.” “That’s been proven a failure	"Okay," the big guy said, his goggles not showing if he agreed or disagreed. "Next, I'd like to see us try government ownership of all businesses." "That's already been shown to not work."

“No—it merely failed. If we had government ownership we’d have the best analytical business minds in the government working for something besides themselves. We’d have Mackays instead of Burlesons; we’d have Morgans in the Treasury Department; we’d have Hills running interstate commerce	"No, it just didn't work out. If the government owned these things, we'd have really smart business people working for the good of everyone, not just for their own benefit. We'd have people like Mackay and Morgan running things instead of the people we have now; we'd have someone like Hill in charge of how states do business with each other."

We’d have the best lawyers in the Senate.” “They wouldn’t give their best efforts for nothing. McAdoo—” “No,” said Amory, shaking his head	"We'd have the smartest lawyers in the Senate." "They wouldn't work hard for free. McAdoo—" "No," Amory said, shaking his head.

“Money isn’t the only stimulus that brings out the best that’s in a man, even in America.” “You said a while ago that it was.” “It is, right now	"Money isn't the only thing that makes people do their best, even in America." "But you just said it was." "It is, at this moment."

But if it were made illegal to have more than a certain amount the best men would all flock for the one other reward which attracts humanity—honor.” The big man made a sound that was very like boo. “That’s the silliest thing you’ve said yet	But if there was a limit on how much money you could have, then the smartest people would all chase the only other thing people really want: respect." The big guy made a noise like he was booing. "That's the dumbest thing you've said so far."

“No, it isn’t silly. It’s quite plausible. If you’d gone to college you’d have been struck by the fact that the men there would work twice as hard for any one of a hundred petty honors as those other men did who were earning their way through	"No, it makes sense. It's actually pretty believable. If you went to college, you'd see guys working way harder for some minor award than other guys working to pay their tuition."

“Kids—child’s play!” scoffed his antagonist. “Not by a darned sight—unless we’re all children	"Kids? Easy!" his opponent laughed. "Not at all - unless we're *all* acting like children."

Did you ever see a grown man when he’s trying for a secret society—or a rising family whose name is up at some club? They’ll jump when they hear the sound of the word. The idea that to make a man work you’ve got to hold gold in front of his eyes is a growth, not an axiom. We’ve done that for so long that we’ve forgotten there’s any other way. We’ve made a world where that’s necessary	Have you ever seen an adult trying to get into a secret club, or a family climbing the social ladder? They'll do anything to get in. The idea that you need money to motivate someone isn't a natural law, it's something we've created. We've been doing it so long, we've forgotten any other way exists. We've built a world where money is the only motivator.

Let me tell you”—Amory became emphatic—“if there were ten men insured against either wealth or starvation, and offered a green ribbon for five hours’ work a day and a blue ribbon for ten hours’ work a day, nine out of ten of them would be trying for the blue ribbon. That competitive instinct only wants a badge	Listen," Amory said, getting serious, "If you had ten people who were guaranteed to never be rich or poor, and you offered a green ribbon for working five hours a day and a blue ribbon for working ten hours a day, nine of them would try to win the blue ribbon. People just want something to compete for."

If the size of their house is the badge they’ll sweat their heads off for that. If it’s only a blue ribbon, I damn near believe they’ll work just as hard. They have in other ages	If people think a big house is how you show you're successful, they'll work like crazy to get one. If they only want some award, I think they'll work just as hard. People have always been like that.

“I don’t agree with you.” “I know it,” said Amory nodding sadly. “It doesn’t matter any more though	"I disagree." "I know," Amory said, nodding sadly. "But it doesn't matter now."

I think these people are going to come and take what they want pretty soon.” A fierce hiss came from the little man	"I think these guys are gonna come and just grab what they want soon." The little man hissed angrily.

“Machine-guns!” “Ah, but you’ve taught them their use.” The big man shook his head. “In this country there are enough property owners not to permit that sort of thing	"Machine guns!" "Yeah, but you showed them how to use them." The big guy shook his head. "Here, we have enough people with things to lose who won't let that happen."

Amory wished he knew the statistics of property owners and non-property owners; he decided to change the subject. But the big man was aroused	Amory wanted to know how many people owned property versus how many didn't, but he changed the subject. The big guy was all fired up, though.

“When you talk of ‘taking things away,’ you’re on dangerous ground.” “How can they get it without taking it? For years people have been stalled off with promises	"When you talk about 'taking things,' that's risky." "How else will they get what they want if they don't take it? They've been put off for years with empty promises."

Socialism may not be progress, but the threat of the red flag is certainly the inspiring force of all reform. You’ve got to be sensational to get attention.” “Russia is your example of a beneficent violence, I suppose?” “Quite possibly,” admitted Amory. “Of course, it’s overflowing just as the French Revolution did, but I’ve no doubt that it’s really a great experiment and well worth while	"Socialism might not be improvement, but the fear of communism definitely pushes for change. You have to be extreme to get noticed." "So, Russia is your example of violence for good, I guess?" "Maybe," Amory said. "Sure, it's going overboard like the French Revolution did, but I think it's a really important test and worth doing."

“Don’t you believe in moderation?” “You won’t listen to the moderates, and it’s almost too late. The truth is that the public has done one of those startling and amazing things that they do about once in a hundred years. They’ve seized an idea	"Don't you think being reasonable is important?" "You never listen to reasonable people, and it's almost too late. The thing is, the public has done something shocking and incredible that they only do maybe once a century. They've grabbed onto an idea."

“What is it?” “That however the brains and abilities of men may differ, their stomachs are essentially the same.”	"What's that about?" "Basically, everyone needs to eat, no matter how smart or talented they are."

“If you took all the money in the world,” said the little man with much profundity, “and divided it up in equ—” “Oh, shut up!” said Amory briskly and, paying no attention to the little man’s enraged stare, he went on with his argument. “The human stomach—” he began; but the big man interrupted rather impatiently. “I’m letting you talk, you know,” he said, “but please avoid stomachs	"If you split all the money in the world equally," the short guy said, trying to sound smart. "Oh, be quiet!" Amory snapped. He ignored the little man's angry look and kept talking. "The human stomach—" he started, but the big guy cut him off, sounding annoyed. "I'm letting you speak, you know," he said, "but please, no talk about stomachs."

I’ve been feeling mine all day. Anyway, I don’t agree with one-half you’ve said. Government ownership is the basis of your whole argument, and it’s invariably a beehive of corruption. Men won’t work for blue ribbons, that’s all rot	I've been thinking about my own stuff all day. Anyway, I disagree with half of what you've said. Your whole argument is based on government ownership, and that's always super corrupt. People don't work just for praise, that's BS.

When he ceased the little man spoke up with a determined nod, as if resolved this time to have his say out. “There are certain things which are human nature,” he asserted with an owl-like look, “which always have been and always will be, which can’t be changed.” Amory looked from the small man to the big man helplessly	When he stopped talking, the little guy nodded firmly and spoke up, like he was finally going to get his point across. Looking wise, he said, "Some things are just human nature. They've always been that way, they always will be, and you can't change them." Amory looked back and forth between the little guy and the big guy, feeling lost.

“Listen to that! That’s what makes me discouraged with progress. Listen to that! I can name offhand over one hundred natural phenomena that have been changed by the will of man—a hundred instincts in man that have been wiped out or are now held in check by civilization. What this man here just said has been for thousands of years the last refuge of the associated muttonheads of the world	"Listen to that! That's why I get bummed out about progress. Listen! I can easily think of over a hundred natural things changed by people's choices. And a hundred human instincts that have been destroyed or are now controlled by society. What that guy just said has been the excuse for dumb people everywhere for thousands of years."

It negates the efforts of every scientist, statesman, moralist, reformer, doctor, and philosopher that ever gave his life to humanity’s service. It’s a flat impeachment of all that’s worth while in human nature. Every person over twenty-five years old who makes that statement in cold blood ought to be deprived of the franchise	It cancels out everything that scientists, politicians, people with morals, reformers, doctors, and thinkers have ever done to help humanity. It’s a complete rejection of everything good about people. Anyone over twenty-five who seriously says that should lose their right to vote.

The little man leaned back against the seat, his face purple with rage. Amory continued, addressing his remarks to the big man	The short guy slumped back in his seat, face red with anger. Amory kept talking, but he spoke to the tall guy.

“These quarter-educated, stale-minded men such as your friend here, who think they think, every question that comes up, you’ll find his type in the usual ghastly muddle. One minute it’s ‘the brutality and inhumanity of these Prussians’—the next it’s ‘we ought to exterminate the whole German people.’ They always believe that ‘things are in a bad way now,’ but they ‘haven’t any faith in these idealists.’ One minute they call Wilson ‘just a dreamer, not practical’—a year later they rail at him for making his dreams realities	"Guys like your friend here, who aren't really that smart and have boring opinions, always get things wrong. They *think* they're thinking, but whenever something comes up, they're totally confused. One minute they're saying how awful the Germans are, the next they're saying we should kill them all. They always complain that things are terrible, but they don't trust anyone with new ideas. They call Wilson a useless dreamer, then complain when he actually makes his dreams come true."

They haven’t clear logical ideas on one single subject except a sturdy, stolid opposition to all change. They don’t think uneducated people should be highly paid, but they won’t see that if they don’t pay the uneducated people their children are going to be uneducated too, and we’re going round and round in a circle	They don't have clear, rational opinions about anything, except they're totally against any kind of change. They don't believe people without education should get paid a lot, but they don't get that if they don't pay those people well, their own kids will also end up uneducated. So, we're just going in circles.

That—is the great middle class!” The big man with a broad grin on his face leaned over and smiled at the little man. “You’re catching it pretty heavy, Garvin; how do you feel?” The little man made an attempt to smile and act as if the whole matter were so ridiculous as to be beneath notice. But Amory was not through	"That's the typical middle class!" The big guy, grinning, leaned over and smiled at the smaller guy. "You're really getting it bad, Garvin; how are you holding up?" The little guy tried to smile and pretend the whole thing was too silly to even care about. But Amory wasn't finished.

“The theory that people are fit to govern themselves rests on this man. If he can be educated to think clearly, concisely, and logically, freed of his habit of taking refuge in platitudes and prejudices and sentimentalisms, then I’m a militant Socialist	The idea that people can rule themselves depends on whether this guy can be taught to think clearly and logically, without relying on clichés, biases, and being overly emotional. If he can, then I'm all for socialism.

If he can’t, then I don’t think it matters much what happens to man or his systems, now or hereafter.” “I am both interested and amused,” said the big man. “You are very young.” “Which may only mean that I have neither been corrupted nor made timid by contemporary experience	If he can't [solve the problem], then it doesn't really matter what happens to people or their societies, now or in the future." "I'm interested and entertained," the big man replied. "You're very young." "Which might just mean that I haven't been ruined or scared by what's going on today."

I possess the most valuable experience, the experience of the race, for in spite of going to college I’ve managed to pick up a good education.” “You talk glibly	I have the most important kind of experience, the kind everyone shares. Even though I went to college, I still learned a lot outside of it.” “You talk smoothly.

“It’s not all rubbish,” cried Amory passionately. “This is the first time in my life I’ve argued Socialism. It’s the only panacea I know. I’m restless	“It’s not all garbage!” Amory said, getting really worked up. “This is the first time I've ever even talked about Socialism. It's the only solution I can think of. I'm just restless."

My whole generation is restless. I’m sick of a system where the richest man gets the most beautiful girl if he wants her, where the artist without an income has to sell his talents to a button manufacturer. Even if I had no talents I’d not be content to work ten years, condemned either to celibacy or a furtive indulgence, to give some man’s son an automobile	My generation can't settle down. I'm tired of a world where rich guys can just buy the hottest girl, and talented artists have to waste their skills to make money. Even if I wasn't talented, I wouldn't want to waste ten years working just to buy some rich guy's kid a car, stuck being lonely or sneaking around for sex.

“But, if you’re not sure—” “That doesn’t matter,” exclaimed Amory. “My position couldn’t be worse	"But if you're not sure..." "It doesn't matter," Amory interrupted. "Things can't get any worse for me anyway."

A social revolution might land me on top. Of course I’m selfish	A big change in society could put me in a good position. I admit I'm selfish.

It seems to me I’ve been a fish out of water in too many outworn systems. I was probably one of the two dozen men in my class at college who got a decent education; still they’d let any well-tutored flathead play football and I was ineligible, because some silly old men thought we should all profit by conic sections	I feel like I never quite fit in with outdated ways of doing things. Maybe I was one of the few in my college class who actually learned something, but they let anyone who was coached well enough play football. I couldn't because some old-fashioned guys thought we all needed to learn math like geometry.

I loathed the army. I loathed business	I hated the army. I hated working.

I’m in love with change and I’ve killed my conscience—” “So you’ll go along crying that we must go faster.” “That, at least, is true,” Amory insisted. “Reform won’t catch up to the needs of civilization unless it’s made to. A laissez-faire policy is like spoiling a child by saying he’ll turn out all right in the end	I love new things, and I don't feel guilty about anything anymore." "So you're going to complain that we need to move even faster." "That's definitely right," Amory said. "Things won't get better fast enough to meet society's needs unless we force them to. Letting things take their own course is like ruining a kid by assuming they'll be fine eventually."

He will—if he’s made to.” “But you don’t believe all this Socialist patter you talk.” “I don’t know	He will, if he's forced to." "But you don't actually believe all that socialist stuff you say, right?" "I'm not sure."

Until I talked to you I hadn’t thought seriously about it. I wasn’t sure of half of what I said.” “You puzzle me,” said the big man, “but you’re all alike	I hadn't really thought about it until I spoke to you. I wasn't even sure if what I was saying made sense." The big man said, "You confuse me, but you're all the same."

They say Bernard Shaw, in spite of his doctrines, is the most exacting of all dramatists about his royalties. To the last farthing.” “Well,” said Amory, “I simply state that I’m a product of a versatile mind in a restless generation—with every reason to throw my mind and pen in with the radicals. Even if, deep in my heart, I thought we were all blind atoms in a world as limited as a stroke of a pendulum, I and my sort would struggle against tradition; try, at least, to displace old cants with new ones	"People say Bernard Shaw, even though he preached socialist ideas, was super strict about getting every penny he was owed from his plays." "Okay," Amory said, "I'm just saying I'm a result of a curious mind in a generation that's always moving and changing. So, I have every reason to support the people who want big changes. Even if I secretly thought we were all just meaningless bits in a world that's small and repetitive, people like me would still fight against old ways. We'd try to replace old, tired ideas with new ones, at least."

I’ve thought I was right about life at various times, but faith is difficult. One thing I know. If living isn’t a seeking for the grail it may be a damned amusing game.” For a minute neither spoke and then the big man asked: “What was your university?” “Princeton	I've been sure I understood life before, but believing is hard. Here's what I do know: If life isn't about searching for something meaningful, it might as well be a funny, but pointless, game." They were silent for a moment. Then the big guy asked, "Where did you go to college?" "Princeton."

The big man became suddenly interested; the expression of his goggles altered slightly. “I sent my son to Princeton.” “Did you?” “Perhaps you knew him	The big guy perked up, you could almost see it in his eyes behind his glasses. "I sent my son to Princeton." "Oh, really?" "Maybe you knew him."

His name was Jesse Ferrenby. He was killed last year in France	His name was Jesse Ferrenby. He died in France last year.

“I knew him very well. In fact, he was one of my particular friends	I knew him really well. He was actually a close friend of mine.

“He was—a—quite a fine boy. We were very close.” Amory began to perceive a resemblance between the father and the dead son and he told himself that there had been all along a sense of familiarity	"He was a really good kid. We were tight." Amory started seeing how the dad and his dead son looked alike. He realized he'd felt like he knew the dad all along.

Jesse Ferrenby, the man who in college had borne off the crown that he had aspired to. It was all so far away. What little boys they had been, working for blue ribbons— The car slowed up at the entrance to a great estate, ringed around by a huge hedge and a tall iron fence. “Won’t you come in for lunch?” Amory shook his head	Jesse Ferrenby, the guy who was king of the hill back in college, the thing he always wanted. It all felt like a lifetime ago. They were just kids back then, trying to win prizes. The car pulled up to the entrance of a big property, surrounded by a huge hedge and a tall iron fence. "Want to come in for lunch?" Amory said no.

“Thank you, Mr. Ferrenby, but I’ve got to get on	"Thanks, Mr. Ferrenby, but I need to go."

The big man held out his hand. Amory saw that the fact that he had known Jesse more than outweighed any disfavor he had created by his opinions	The older guy shook his hand. Amory realized knowing Jesse for longer mattered more than any trouble his opinions caused.

What ghosts were people with which to work! Even the little man insisted on shaking hands. “Goodbye!” shouted Mr. Ferrenby, as the car turned the corner and started up the drive	Dealing with these people was exhausting! Even the little guy made sure to shake hands. "Goodbye!" Mr. Ferrenby yelled as the car rounded the corner and headed up the driveway.

“Good luck to you and bad luck to your theories.” “Same to you, sir,” cried Amory, smiling and waving his hand.	"Good luck to you, but your ideas are wrong." "Right back at you, pal," Amory replied, smiling and waving.

