				Act 				I




					Scene 					I


				Elsinore. A platform before the castle.

				 					 						 							 							 								Francisco at his post. Enter to him Bernardo.

						 							 Bernardo 							 Who’s there?

						 							 Francisco 							 Nay, answer me: stand, and unfold yourself.

						 							 Bernardo 							 Long live the king!

						 							 Francisco 							 Bernardo?

						 							 Bernardo 							 He.

						 							 Francisco 							 You come most carefully upon your hour.

						 							 Bernardo 							 ’Tis now struck twelve; get thee to bed, Francisco.

						 							 Francisco 							 								 									For this relief much thanks: ’tis bitter cold,

									 									And I am sick at heart.





						 							 Bernardo 							 Have you had quiet guard?

						 							 Francisco 							 Not a mouse stirring.

						 							 Bernardo 							 								 									Well, good night.

									 									If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,

									 									The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.





						 							 Francisco 							 I think I hear them. Stand, ho! Who’s there?

						 							 							 								Enter Horatio and Marcellus.

						 							 Horatio 							 Friends to this ground.

						 							 Marcellus 							 And liegemen to the Dane.

						 							 Francisco 							 Give you good night.

						 							 Marcellus 							 								 									O, farewell, honest soldier:

									 									Who hath relieved you?





						 							 Francisco 							 								 									Bernardo has my place.

									 									Give you good night. Exit.





						 							 Marcellus 							 Holla! Bernardo!

						 							 Bernardo 							 								 									Say,

									 									What, is Horatio there?





						 							 Horatio 							 A piece of him.

						 							 Bernardo 							 Welcome, Horatio: welcome, good Marcellus.

						 							 Marcellus 							 What, has this thing appear’d again to-night?

						 							 Bernardo 							 I have seen nothing.

						 							 Marcellus 							 								 									Horatio says ’tis but our fantasy,

									 									And will not let belief take hold of him

									 									Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us:

									 									Therefore I have entreated him along

									 									With us to watch the minutes of this night;

									 									That if again this apparition come,

									 									He may approve our eyes and speak to it.





						 							 Horatio 							 Tush, tush, ’twill not appear.

						 							 Bernardo 							 								 									Sit down awhile;

									 									And let us once again assail your ears,

									 									That are so fortified against our story

									 									What we have two nights seen.





						 							 Horatio 							 								 									Well, sit we down,

									 									And let us hear Bernardo speak of this.





						 							 Bernardo 							 								 									Last night of all,

									 									When yond same star that’s westward from the pole

									 									Had made his course to illume that part of heaven

									 									Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,

									 									The bell then beating one—





						 							 							 								Enter Ghost.

						 							 Marcellus 							 Peace, break thee off; look, where it comes again!

						 							 Bernardo 							 In the same figure, like the king that’s dead.

						 							 Marcellus 							 Thou art a scholar; speak to it, Horatio.

						 							 Bernardo 							 Looks it not like the king? mark it, Horatio.

						 							 Horatio 							 Most like: it harrows me with fear and wonder.

						 							 Bernardo 							 It would be spoke to.

						 							 Marcellus 							 Question it, Horatio.

						 							 Horatio 							 								 									What art thou that usurp’st this time of night,

									 									Together with that fair and warlike form

									 									In which the majesty of buried Denmark

									 									Did sometimes march? by heaven I charge thee, speak!





						 							 Marcellus 							 It is offended.

						 							 Bernardo 							 See, it stalks away!

						 							 Horatio 							 Stay! speak, speak! I charge thee, speak! Exit Ghost.

						 							 Marcellus 							 ’Tis gone, and will not answer.

						 							 Bernardo 							 								 									How now, Horatio! you tremble and look pale:

									 									Is not this something more than fantasy?

									 									What think you on’t?





						 							 Horatio 							 								 									Before my God, I might not this believe

									 									Without the sensible and true avouch

									 									Of mine own eyes.





						 							 Marcellus 							 Is it not like the king?

						 							 Horatio 							 								 									As thou art to thyself:

									 									Such was the very armour he had on

									 									When he the ambitious Norway combated;

									 									So frown’d he once, when, in an angry parle,

									 									He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.

									 									’Tis strange.





						 							 Marcellus 							 								 									Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,

									 									With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.





						 							 Horatio 							 								 									In what particular thought to work I know not;

									 									But in the gross and scope of my opinion,

									 									This bodes some strange eruption to our state.





						 							 Marcellus 							 								 									Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,

									 									Why this same strict and most observant watch

									 									So nightly toils the subject of the land,

									 									And why such daily cast of brazen cannon,

									 									And foreign mart for implements of war;

									 									Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task

									 									Does not divide the Sunday from the week;

									 									What might be toward, that this sweaty haste

									 									Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day:

									 									Who is’t that can inform me?





						 							 Horatio 							 								 									That can I;

									 									At least, the whisper goes so. Our last king,

									 									Whose image even but now appear’d to us,

									 									Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,

									 									Thereto prick’d on by a most emulate pride,

									 									Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet—

									 									For so this side of our known world esteem’d him—

									 									Did slay this Fortinbras; who, by a seal’d compact,

									 									Well ratified by law and heraldry,

									 									Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands

									 									Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror:

									 									Against the which, a moiety competent

									 									Was gaged by our king; which had return’d

									 									To the inheritance of Fortinbras,

									 									Had he been vanquisher; as, by the same covenant,

									 									And carriage of the article design’d,

									 									His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,

									 									Of unimproved mettle hot and full,

									 									Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there

									 									Shark’d up a list of lawless resolutes,

									 									For food and diet, to some enterprise

									 									That hath a stomach in’t; which is no other—

									 									As it doth well appear unto our state—

									 									But to recover of us, by strong hand

									 									And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands

									 									So by his father lost: and this, I take it,

									 									Is the main motive of our preparations,

									 									The source of this our watch and the chief head

									 									Of this post-haste and romage in the land.





						 							 Bernardo 							 								 									I think it be no other but e’en so:

									 									Well may it sort that this portentous figure

									 									Comes armed through our watch; so like the king

									 									That was and is the question of these wars.





						 							 Horatio 							 								 									A mote it is to trouble the mind’s eye.

									 									In the most high and palmy state of Rome,

									 									A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,

									 									The graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead

									 									Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets:

									 									As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,

									 									Disasters in the sun; and the moist star

									 									Upon whose influence Neptune’s empire stands

									 									Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse:

									 									And even the like precurse of fierce events,

									 									As harbingers preceding still the fates

									 									And prologue to the omen coming on,

									 									Have heaven and earth together demonstrated

									 									Unto our climatures and countrymen.—

									 									But soft, behold! lo, where it comes again!





						 							 							 								Reenter Ghost.

						 							 							 								 									I’ll cross it, though it blast me. Stay, illusion!

									 									If thou hast any sound, or use of voice,

									 									Speak to me:

									 									If there be any good thing to be done,

									 									That may to thee do ease and grace to me,

									 									Speak to me: Cock crows.

									 									If thou art privy to thy country’s fate,

									 									Which, happily, foreknowing may avoid,

									 									O, speak!

									 									Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life

									 									Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,

									 									For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,

									 									Speak of it: stay, and speak! Stop it, Marcellus.





						 							 Marcellus 							 Shall I strike at it with my partisan?

						 							 Horatio 							 Do, if it will not stand.

						 							 Bernardo 							 ’Tis here!

						 							 Horatio 							 ’Tis here!

						 							 Marcellus 							 								 									’Tis gone! Exit Ghost.

									 									We do it wrong, being so majestical,

									 									To offer it the show of violence;

									 									For it is, as the air, invulnerable,

									 									And our vain blows malicious mockery.





						 							 Bernardo 							 It was about to speak, when the cock crew.

						 							 Horatio 							 								 									And then it started like a guilty thing

									 									Upon a fearful summons. I have heard,

									 									The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,

									 									Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat

									 									Awake the god of day; and, at his warning,

									 									Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,

									 									The extravagant and erring spirit hies

									 									To his confine: and of the truth herein

									 									This present object made probation.





						 							 Marcellus 							 								 									It faded on the crowing of the cock.

									 									Some say that ever ’gainst that season comes

									 									Wherein our Saviour’s birth is celebrated,

									 									The bird of dawning singeth all night long:

									 									And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad;

									 									The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike,

									 									No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,

									 									So hallow’d and so gracious is the time.





						 							 Horatio 							 								 									So have I heard and do in part believe it.

									 									But, look, the morn, in russet mantle clad,

									 									Walks o’er the dew of yon high eastward hill:

									 									Break we our watch up; and by my advice,

									 									Let us impart what we have seen to-night

									 									Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,

									 									This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.

									 									Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,

									 									As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?





						 							 Marcellus 							 								 									Let’s do’t, I pray; and I this morning know

									 									Where we shall find him most conveniently. Exeunt.





					Scene 					II


				A room of state in the castle.

				 					 						 							 							 								Enter King, Queen, Hamlet, Polonius, Laertes, Voltimand, Cornelius, Lords, and Attendants.

						 							 King 							 								 									Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother’s death

									 									The memory be green, and that it us befitted

									 									To bear our hearts in grief and our whole kingdom

									 									To be contracted in one brow of woe,

									 									Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature

									 									That we with wisest sorrow think on him,

									 									Together with remembrance of ourselves.

									 									Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,

									 									The imperial jointress to this warlike state,

									 									Have we, as ’twere with a defeated joy—

									 									With an auspicious and a dropping eye,

									 									With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage,

									 									In equal scale weighing delight and dole—

									 									Taken to wife: nor have we herein barr’d

									 									Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone

									 									With this affair along. For all, our thanks.

									 									Now follows, that you know, young Fortinbras,

									 									Holding a weak supposal of our worth,

									 									Or thinking by our late dear brother’s death

									 									Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,

									 									Colleagued with the dream of his advantage,

									 									He hath not fail’d to pester us with message,

									 									Importing the surrender of those lands

									 									Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,

									 									To our most valiant brother. So much for him.

									 									Now for ourself and for this time of meeting:

									 									Thus much the business is: we have here writ

									 									To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras—

									 									Who, impotent and bed-rid, scarcely hears

									 									Of this his nephew’s purpose—to suppress

									 									His further gait herein; in that the levies,

									 									The lists and full proportions, are all made

									 									Out of his subject: and we here dispatch

									 									You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltimand,

									 									For bearers of this greeting to old Norway;

									 									Giving to you no further personal power

									 									To business with the king, more than the scope

									 									Of these delated articles allow.

									 									Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.





						 							 Cornelius

							Voltimand 							 In that and all things will we show our duty.

						 							 King 							 								 									We doubt it nothing: heartily farewell. Exeunt Voltimand and Cornelius.

									 									And now, Laertes, what’s the news with you?

									 									You told us of some suit; what is’t, Laertes?

									 									You cannot speak of reason to the Dane,

									 									And lose your voice: what wouldst thou beg, Laertes,

									 									That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?

									 									The head is not more native to the heart,

									 									The hand more instrumental to the mouth,

									 									Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.

									 									What wouldst thou have, Laertes?





						 							 Laertes 							 								 									My dread lord,

									 									Your leave and favour to return to France;

									 									From whence though willingly I came to Denmark,

									 									To show my duty in your coronation,

									 									Yet now, I must confess, that duty done,

									 									My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France

									 									And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.





						 							 King 							 Have you your father’s leave? What says Polonius?

						 							 Polonius 							 								 									He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave

									 									By laboursome petition, and at last

									 									Upon his will I seal’d my hard consent:

									 									I do beseech you, give him leave to go.





						 							 King 							 								 									Take thy fair hour, Laertes; time be thine,

									 									And thy best graces spend it at thy will!

									 									But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son—





						 							 Hamlet 							 Aside. A little more than kin, and less than kind.

						 							 King 							 How is it that the clouds still hang on you?

						 							 Hamlet 							 Not so, my lord; I am too much i’ the sun.

						 							 Queen 							 								 									Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off,

									 									And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.

									 									Do not for ever with thy vailed lids

									 									Seek for thy noble father in the dust:

									 									Thou know’st ’tis common; all that lives must die,

									 									Passing through nature to eternity.





						 							 Hamlet 							 Ay, madam, it is common.

						 							 Queen 							 								 									If it be,

									 									Why seems it so particular with thee?





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Seems, madam! nay, it is; I know not “seems.”

									 									’Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,

									 									Nor customary suits of solemn black,

									 									Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,

									 									No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,

									 									Nor the dejected ’havior of the visage,

									 									Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,

									 									That can denote me truly: these indeed seem,

									 									For they are actions that a man might play:

									 									But I have that within which passeth show;

									 									These but the trappings and the suits of woe.





						 							 King 							 								 									’Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet,

									 									To give these mourning duties to your father:

									 									But, you must know, your father lost a father;

									 									That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound

									 									In filial obligation for some term

									 									To do obsequious sorrow: but to persever

									 									In obstinate condolement is a course

									 									Of impious stubbornness; ’tis unmanly grief;

									 									It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,

									 									A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,

									 									An understanding simple and unschool’d:

									 									For what we know must be and is as common

									 									As any the most vulgar thing to sense,

									 									Why should we in our peevish opposition

									 									Take it to heart? Fie! ’tis a fault to heaven,

									 									A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,

									 									To reason most absurd; whose common theme

									 									Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,

									 									From the first corse till he that died to-day,

									 									“This must be so.” We pray you, throw to earth

									 									This unprevailing woe, and think of us

									 									As of a father: for let the world take note,

									 									You are the most immediate to our throne;

									 									And with no less nobility of love

									 									Than that which dearest father bears his son,

									 									Do I impart toward you. For your intent

									 									In going back to school in Wittenberg,

									 									It is most retrograde to our desire:

									 									And we beseech you, bend you to remain

									 									Here, in the cheer and comfort of our eye,

									 									Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.





						 							 Queen 							 								 									Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet:

									 									I pray thee, stay with us; go not to Wittenberg.





						 							 Hamlet 							 I shall in all my best obey you, madam.

						 							 King 							 								 									Why, ’tis a loving and a fair reply:

									 									Be as ourself in Denmark. Madam, come;

									 									This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet

									 									Sits smiling to my heart: in grace whereof,

									 									No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day,

									 									But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,

									 									And the king’s rouse the heavens shall bruit again,

									 									Re-speaking earthly thunder. Come away. Exeunt all but Hamlet.





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									O, that this too too solid flesh would melt,

									 									Thaw and resolve itself into a dew!

									 									Or that the Everlasting had not fix’d

									 									His canon ’gainst self-slaughter! O God! God!

									 									How weary, stale, flat and unprofitable,

									 									Seem to me all the uses of this world!

									 									Fie on’t! ah fie! ’tis an unweeded garden,

									 									That grows to seed; things rank and gross in nature

									 									Possess it merely. That it should come to this!

									 									But two months dead: nay, not so much, not two:

									 									So excellent a king; that was, to this,

									 									Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother

									 									That he might not beteem the winds of heaven

									 									Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth!

									 									Must I remember? why, she would hang on him,

									 									As if increase of appetite had grown

									 									By what it fed on: and yet, within a month—

									 									Let me not think on’t—Frailty, thy name is woman!—

									 									A little month, or ere those shoes were old

									 									With which she follow’d my poor father’s body,

									 									Like Niobe, all tears:—why she, even she—

									 									O, God! a beast, that wants discourse of reason,

									 									Would have mourn’d longer—married with my uncle,

									 									My father’s brother, but no more like my father

									 									Than I to Hercules: within a month:

									 									Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears

									 									Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,

									 									She married. O, most wicked speed, to post

									 									With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!

									 									It is not nor it cannot come to good:

									 									But break, my heart; for I must hold my tongue.





						 							 							 								Enter Horatio, Marcellus, and Bernardo.

						 							 Horatio 							 Hail to your lordship!

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									I am glad to see you well:

									 									Horatio—or I do forget myself.





						 							 Horatio 							 The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Sir, my good friend; I’ll change that name with you:

									 									And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?

									 									Marcellus?





						 							 Marcellus 							 My good lord—

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									I am very glad to see you. Good even, sir.

									 									But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?





						 							 Horatio 							 A truant disposition, good my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									I would not hear your enemy say so,

									 									Nor shall you do mine ear that violence,

									 									To make it truster of your own report

									 									Against yourself: I know you are no truant.

									 									But what is your affair in Elsinore?

									 									We’ll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.





						 							 Horatio 							 My lord, I came to see your father’s funeral.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									I pray thee, do not mock me, fellow-student;

									 									I think it was to see my mother’s wedding.





						 							 Horatio 							 Indeed, my lord, it follow’d hard upon.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Thrift, thrift, Horatio! the funeral baked meats

									 									Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.

									 									Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven

									 									Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!

									 									My father!—methinks I see my father.





						 							 Horatio 							 Where, my lord?

						 							 Hamlet 							 In my mind’s eye, Horatio.

						 							 Horatio 							 I saw him once; he was a goodly king.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									He was a man, take him for all in all,

									 									I shall not look upon his like again.





						 							 Horatio 							 My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Saw? who?

						 							 Horatio 							 My lord, the king your father.

						 							 Hamlet 							 The king my father!

						 							 Horatio 							 								 									Season your admiration for a while

									 									With an attent ear, till I may deliver,

									 									Upon the witness of these gentlemen,

									 									This marvel to you.





						 							 Hamlet 							 For God’s love, let me hear.

						 							 Horatio 							 								 									Two nights together had these gentlemen,

									 									Marcellus and Bernardo, on their watch,

									 									In the dead vast and middle of the night,

									 									Been thus encounter’d. A figure like your father,

									 									Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe,

									 									Appears before them, and with solemn march

									 									Goes slow and stately by them: thrice he walk’d

									 									By their oppress’d and fear-surprised eyes,

									 									Within his truncheon’s length; whilst they, distill’d

									 									Almost to jelly with the act of fear,

									 									Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me

									 									In dreadful secrecy impart they did;

									 									And I with them the third night kept the watch:

									 									Where, as they had deliver’d, both in time,

									 									Form of the thing, each word made true and good,

									 									The apparition comes: I knew your father;

									 									These hands are not more like.





						 							 Hamlet 							 But where was this?

						 							 Marcellus 							 My lord, upon the platform where we watch’d.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Did you not speak to it?

						 							 Horatio 							 								 									My lord, I did;

									 									But answer made it none: yet once methought

									 									It lifted up its head and did address

									 									Itself to motion, like as it would speak;

									 									But even then the morning cock crew loud,

									 									And at the sound it shrunk in haste away,

									 									And vanish’d from our sight.





						 							 Hamlet 							 ’Tis very strange.

						 							 Horatio 							 								 									As I do live, my honour’d lord, ’tis true;

									 									And we did think it writ down in our duty

									 									To let you know of it.





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Indeed, indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.

									 									Hold you the watch to-night?





						 							 Marcellus

							Bernardo 							 We do, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Arm’d, say you?

						 							 Marcellus

							Bernardo 							 Arm’d, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 From top to toe?

						 							 Marcellus

							Bernardo 							 My lord, from head to foot.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Then saw you not his face?

						 							 Horatio 							 O, yes, my lord; he wore his beaver up.

						 							 Hamlet 							 What, look’d he frowningly?

						 							 Horatio 							 A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Pale or red?

						 							 Horatio 							 Nay, very pale.

						 							 Hamlet 							 And fix’d his eyes upon you?

						 							 Horatio 							 Most constantly.

						 							 Hamlet 							 I would I had been there.

						 							 Horatio 							 It would have much amazed you.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Very like, very like. Stay’d it long?

						 							 Horatio 							 While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.

						 							 Marcellus

							Bernardo 							 Longer, longer.

						 							 Horatio 							 Not when I saw’t.

						 							 Hamlet 							 His beard was grizzled—no?

						 							 Horatio 							 								 									It was, as I have seen it in his life,

									 									A sable silver’d.





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									I will watch to-night;

									 									Perchance ’twill walk again.





						 							 Horatio 							 I warrant it will.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									If it assume my noble father’s person,

									 									I’ll speak to it, though hell itself should gape

									 									And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,

									 									If you have hitherto conceal’d this sight,

									 									Let it be tenable in your silence still;

									 									And whatsoever else shall hap to-night,

									 									Give it an understanding, but no tongue:

									 									I will requite your loves. So, fare you well:

									 									Upon the platform, ’twixt eleven and twelve,

									 									I’ll visit you.





						 							 All 							 Our duty to your honour.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Your loves, as mine to you: farewell. Exeunt all but Hamlet.

									 									My father’s spirit in arms! all is not well;

									 									I doubt some foul play: would the night were come!

									 									Till then sit still, my soul: foul deeds will rise,

									 									Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s eyes. Exit.
