					Scene 					III


				A room in Polonius’ house.

				 					 						 							 							 								Enter Laertes and Ophelia.

						 							 Laertes 							 								 									My necessaries are embark’d: farewell:

									 									And, sister, as the winds give benefit

									 									And convoy is assistant, do not sleep,

									 									But let me hear from you.





						 							 Ophelia 							 Do you doubt that?

						 							 Laertes 							 								 									For Hamlet and the trifling of his favour,

									 									Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,

									 									A violet in the youth of primy nature,

									 									Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,

									 									The perfume and suppliance of a minute;

									 									No more.





						 							 Ophelia 							 No more but so?

						 							 Laertes 							 								 									Think it no more:

									 									For nature, crescent, does not grow alone

									 									In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes,

									 									The inward service of the mind and soul

									 									Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,

									 									And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch

									 									The virtue of his will: but you must fear,

									 									His greatness weigh’d, his will is not his own;

									 									For he himself is subject to his birth:

									 									He may not, as unvalued persons do,

									 									Carve for himself; for on his choice depends

									 									The safety and health of this whole state;

									 									And therefore must his choice be circumscribed

									 									Unto the voice and yielding of that body

									 									Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you,

									 									It fits your wisdom so far to believe it

									 									As he in his particular act and place

									 									May give his saying deed; which is no further

									 									Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.

									 									Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain,

									 									If with too credent ear you list his songs,

									 									Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open

									 									To his unmaster’d importunity.

									 									Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister,

									 									And keep you in the rear of your affection,

									 									Out of the shot and danger of desire.

									 									The chariest maid is prodigal enough,

									 									If she unmask her beauty to the moon:

									 									Virtue itself ’scapes not calumnious strokes:

									 									The canker galls the infants of the spring,

									 									Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,

									 									And in the morn and liquid dew of youth

									 									Contagious blastments are most imminent.

									 									Be wary then; best safety lies in fear:

									 									Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.





						 							 Ophelia 							 								 									I shall the effect of this good lesson keep,

									 									As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,

									 									Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,

									 									Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven;

									 									Whiles, like a puff’d and reckless libertine,

									 									Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads,

									 									And recks not his own rede.





						 							 Laertes 							 								 									O, fear me not.

									 									I stay too long: but here my father comes.





						 							 							 								Enter Polonius.

						 							 							 								 									A double blessing is a double grace;

									 									Occasion smiles upon a second leave.





						 							 Polonius 							 								 									Yet here, Laertes! aboard, aboard, for shame!

									 									The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,

									 									And you are stay’d for. There; my blessing with thee!

									 									And these few precepts in thy memory

									 									See thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,

									 									Nor any unproportion’d thought his act.

									 									Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.

									 									Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,

									 									Grapple them to thy soul with hoops of steel;

									 									But do not dull thy palm with entertainment

									 									Of each new-hatch’d, unfledged comrade. Beware

									 									Of entrance to a quarrel, but being in,

									 									Bear’t that the opposed may beware of thee.

									 									Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice;

									 									Take each man’s censure, but reserve thy judgment.

									 									Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,

									 									But not express’d in fancy; rich, not gaudy;

									 									For the apparel oft proclaims the man,

									 									And they in France of the best rank and station

									 									Are of a most select and generous chief in that.

									 									Neither a borrower nor a lender be;

									 									For loan oft loses both itself and friend,

									 									And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.

									 									This above all: to thine ownself be true,

									 									And it must follow, as the night the day,

									 									Thou canst not then be false to any man.

									 									Farewell: my blessing season this in thee!





						 							 Laertes 							 Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.

						 							 Polonius 							 The time invites you; go; your servants tend.

						 							 Laertes 							 								 									Farewell, Ophelia; and remember well

									 									What I have said to you.





						 							 Ophelia 							 								 									’Tis in my memory lock’d,

									 									And you yourself shall keep the key of it.





						 							 Laertes 							 Farewell. Exit.

						 							 Polonius 							 What is’t, Ophelia, he hath said to you?

						 							 Ophelia 							 So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet.

						 							 Polonius 							 								 									Marry, well bethought:

									 									’Tis told me, he hath very oft of late

									 									Given private time to you; and you yourself

									 									Have of your audience been most free and bounteous:

									 									If it be so, as so ’tis put on me,

									 									And that in way of caution, I must tell you,

									 									You do not understand yourself so clearly

									 									As it behoves my daughter and your honour.

									 									What is between you? give me up the truth.





						 							 Ophelia 							 								 									He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders

									 									Of his affection to me.





						 							 Polonius 							 								 									Affection! pooh! you speak like a green girl,

									 									Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.

									 									Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?





						 							 Ophelia 							 I do not know, my lord, what I should think.

						 							 Polonius 							 								 									Marry, I’ll teach you: think yourself a baby;

									 									That you have ta’en these tenders for true pay,

									 									Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly;

									 									Or—not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,

									 									Running it thus—you’ll tender me a fool.





						 							 Ophelia 							 								 									My lord, he hath importuned me with love

									 									In honourable fashion.





						 							 Polonius 							 Ay, fashion you may call it; go to, go to.

						 							 Ophelia 							 								 									And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,

									 									With almost all the holy vows of heaven.





						 							 Polonius 							 								 									Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,

									 									When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul

									 									Lends the tongue vows: these blazes, daughter,

									 									Giving more light than heat, extinct in both,

									 									Even in their promise, as it is a-making,

									 									You must not take for fire. From this time

									 									Be somewhat scanter of your maiden presence;

									 									Set your entreatments at a higher rate

									 									Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet,

									 									Believe so much in him, that he is young,

									 									And with a larger tether may he walk

									 									Than may be given you: in few, Ophelia,

									 									Do not believe his vows; for they are brokers,

									 									Not of that dye which their investments show,

									 									But mere implorators of unholy suits,

									 									Breathing like sanctified and pious bonds,

									 									The better to beguile. This is for all:

									 									I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth,

									 									Have you so slander any moment leisure,

									 									As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.

									 									Look to’t, I charge you: come your ways.





						 							 Ophelia 							 I shall obey, my lord. Exeunt.





					Scene 					IV


				The platform.

				 					 						 							 							 								Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus.

						 							 Hamlet 							 The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.

						 							 Horatio 							 It is a nipping and an eager air.

						 							 Hamlet 							 What hour now?

						 							 Horatio 							 I think it lacks of twelve.

						 							 Hamlet 							 No, it is struck.

						 							 Horatio 							 								 									Indeed? I heard it not: then it draws near the season

									 									Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk. A flourish of trumpets, and ordnance shot off, within.

									 									What does this mean, my lord?





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									The king doth wake to-night and takes his rouse,

									 									Keeps wassail, and the swaggering up-spring reels;

									 									And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,

									 									The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out

									 									The triumph of his pledge.





						 							 Horatio 							 Is it a custom?

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Ay, marry, is’t:

									 									But to my mind, though I am native here

									 									And to the manner born, it is a custom

									 									More honour’d in the breach than the observance.

									 									This heavy-headed revel east and west

									 									Makes us traduced and tax’d of other nations:

									 									They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase

									 									Soil our addition; and indeed it takes

									 									From our achievements, though perform’d at height,

									 									The pith and marrow of our attribute.

									 									So, oft it chances in particular men,

									 									That for some vicious mole of nature in them,

									 									As, in their birth—wherein they are not guilty,

									 									Since nature cannot choose his origin—

									 									By the o’ergrowth of some complexion,

									 									Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason,

									 									Or by some habit that too much o’er-leavens

									 									The form of plausive manners, that these men,

									 									Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,

									 									Being nature’s livery, or fortune’s star—

									 									Their virtues else—be they as pure as grace,

									 									As infinite as man may undergo—

									 									Shall in the general censure take corruption

									 									From that particular fault: the dram of eale

									 									Doth all the noble substance of a doubt

									 									To his own scandal.





						 							 Horatio 							 Look, my lord, it comes!

						 							 							 								Enter Ghost.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Angels and ministers of grace defend us!

									 									Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn’d,

									 									Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell,

									 									Be thy intents wicked or charitable,

									 									Thou comest in such a questionable shape

									 									That I will speak to thee: I’ll call thee Hamlet,

									 									King, father, royal Dane: O, answer me!

									 									Let me not burst in ignorance; but tell

									 									Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death,

									 									Have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre,

									 									Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn’d,

									 									Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws,

									 									To cast thee up again. What may this mean,

									 									That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel

									 									Revisit’st thus the glimpses of the moon,

									 									Making night hideous; and we fools of nature

									 									So horridly to shake our disposition

									 									With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?

									 									Say, why is this? wherefore? what should we do? Ghost beckons Hamlet.





						 							 Horatio 							 								 									It beckons you to go away with it,

									 									As if it some impartment did desire

									 									To you alone.





						 							 Marcellus 							 								 									Look, with what courteous action

									 									It waves you to a more removed ground:

									 									But do not go with it.





						 							 Horatio 							 No, by no means.

						 							 Hamlet 							 It will not speak; then I will follow it.

						 							 Horatio 							 Do not, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Why, what should be the fear?

									 									I do not set my life in a pin’s fee;

									 									And for my soul, what can it do to that,

									 									Being a thing immortal as itself?

									 									It waves me forth again: I’ll follow it.





						 							 Horatio 							 								 									What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord,

									 									Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff

									 									That beetles o’er his base into the sea,

									 									And there assume some other horrible form,

									 									Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason

									 									And draw you into madness? think of it:

									 									The very place puts toys of desperation,

									 									Without more motive, into every brain

									 									That looks so many fathoms to the sea

									 									And hears it roar beneath.





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									It waves me still.

									 									Go on; I’ll follow thee.





						 							 Marcellus 							 You shall not go, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Hold off your hands.

						 							 Horatio 							 Be ruled; you shall not go.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									My fate cries out,

									 									And makes each petty artery in this body

									 									As hardy as the Nemean lion’s nerve.

									 									Still am I call’d. Unhand me, gentlemen.

									 									By heaven, I’ll make a ghost of him that lets me!

									 									I say, away! Go on; I’ll follow thee. Exeunt Ghost and Hamlet.





						 							 Horatio 							 He waxes desperate with imagination.

						 							 Marcellus 							 Let’s follow; ’tis not fit thus to obey him.

						 							 Horatio 							 Have after. To what issue will this come?

						 							 Marcellus 							 Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.

						 							 Horatio 							 Heaven will direct it.

						 							 Marcellus 							 Nay, let’s follow him. Exeunt.





					Scene 					V


				Another part of the platform.

				 					 						 							 							 								Enter Ghost and Hamlet.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Where wilt thou lead me? speak; I’ll go no further.

						 							 Ghost 							 Mark me.

						 							 Hamlet 							 I will.

						 							 Ghost 							 								 									My hour is almost come,

									 									When I to sulphurous and tormenting flames

									 									Must render up myself.





						 							 Hamlet 							 Alas, poor ghost!

						 							 Ghost 							 								 									Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing

									 									To what I shall unfold.





						 							 Hamlet 							 Speak; I am bound to hear.

						 							 Ghost 							 So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.

						 							 Hamlet 							 What?

						 							 Ghost 							 								 									I am thy father’s spirit,

									 									Doom’d for a certain term to walk the night,

									 									And for the day confined to fast in fires,

									 									Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature

									 									Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid

									 									To tell the secrets of my prison-house,

									 									I could a tale unfold whose lightest word

									 									Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,

									 									Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres,

									 									Thy knotted and combined locks to part

									 									And each particular hair to stand on end,

									 									Like quills upon the fretful porpentine:

									 									But this eternal blazon must not be

									 									To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list!

									 									If thou didst ever thy dear father love—





						 							 Hamlet 							 O God!

						 							 Ghost 							 Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Murder!

						 							 Ghost 							 								 									Murder most foul, as in the best it is;

									 									But this most foul, strange and unnatural.





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Haste me to know’t, that I, with wings as swift

									 									As meditation or the thoughts of love,

									 									May sweep to my revenge.





						 							 Ghost 							 								 									I find thee apt;

									 									And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed

									 									That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,

									 									Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear:

									 									’Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,

									 									A serpent stung me; so the whole ear of Denmark

									 									Is by a forged process of my death

									 									Rankly abused: but know, thou noble youth,

									 									The serpent that did sting thy father’s life

									 									Now wears his crown.





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									O my prophetic soul!

									 									My uncle!





						 							 Ghost 							 								 									Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,

									 									With witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts—

									 									O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power

									 									So to seduce!—won to his shameful lust

									 									The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen:

									 									O Hamlet, what a falling-off was there!

									 									From me, whose love was of that dignity

									 									That it went hand in hand even with the vow

									 									I made to her in marriage, and to decline

									 									Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor

									 									To those of mine!

									 									But virtue, as it never will be moved,

									 									Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,

									 									So lust, though to a radiant angel link’d,

									 									Will sate itself in a celestial bed,

									 									And prey on garbage.

									 									But, soft! methinks I scent the morning air;

									 									Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,

									 									My custom always of the afternoon,

									 									Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole,

									 									With juice of cursed hebenon in a vial,

									 									And in the porches of my ears did pour

									 									The leperous distilment; whose effect

									 									Holds such an enmity with blood of man

									 									That swift as quicksilver it courses through

									 									The natural gates and alleys of the body,

									 									And with a sudden vigour doth posset

									 									And curd, like eager droppings into milk,

									 									The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine;

									 									And a most instant tetter bark’d about,

									 									Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust,

									 									All my smooth body.

									 									Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother’s hand

									 									Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch’d:

									 									Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,

									 									Unhousel’d, disappointed, unaneled,

									 									No reckoning made, but sent to my account

									 									With all my imperfections on my head:

									 									O, horrible! O, horrible! most horrible!

									 									If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not;

									 									Let not the royal bed of Denmark be

									 									A couch for luxury and damned incest.

									 									But, howsoever thou pursuest this act,

									 									Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive

									 									Against thy mother aught: leave her to heaven

									 									And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge,

									 									To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once!

									 									The glow-worm shows the matin to be near,

									 									And ’gins to pale his uneffectual fire:

									 									Adieu, adieu! Hamlet, remember me. Exit.





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									O all you host of heaven! O earth! what else?

									 									And shall I couple hell? O, fie! Hold, hold, my heart;

									 									And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,

									 									But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee!

									 									Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat

									 									In this distracted globe. Remember thee!

									 									Yea, from the table of my memory

									 									I’ll wipe away all trivial fond records,

									 									All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,

									 									That youth and observation copied there;

									 									And thy commandment all alone shall live

									 									Within the book and volume of my brain,

									 									Unmix’d with baser matter: yes, by heaven!

									 									O most pernicious woman!

									 									O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!

									 									My tables—meet it is I set it down,

									 									That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain;

									 									At least I’m sure it may be so in Denmark: Writing.

									 									So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word;

									 									It is “Adieu, adieu! remember me.”

									 									I have sworn’t.





						 							 Marcellus

							Horatio 							 Within. My lord, my lord—

						 							 Marcellus 							 Within. Lord Hamlet—

						 							 Horatio 							 Within. Heaven secure him!

						 							 Hamlet 							 So be it!

						 							 Horatio 							 Within. Hillo, ho, ho, my lord!

						 							 Hamlet 							 Hillo, ho, ho, boy! come, bird, come.

						 							 							 								Enter Horatio and Marcellus.

						 							 Marcellus 							 How is’t, my noble lord?

						 							 Horatio 							 What news, my lord?

						 							 Hamlet 							 O, wonderful!

						 							 Horatio 							 Good my lord, tell it.

						 							 Hamlet 							 No; you’ll reveal it.

						 							 Horatio 							 Not I, my lord, by heaven.

						 							 Marcellus 							 Nor I, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									How say you, then; would heart of man once think it?

									 									But you’ll be secret?





						 							 Horatio

							Marcellus 							 Ay, by heaven, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									There’s ne’er a villain dwelling in all Denmark

									 									But he’s an arrant knave.





						 							 Horatio 							 								 									There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave

									 									To tell us this.





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Why, right; you are i’ the right;

									 									And so, without more circumstance at all,

									 									I hold it fit that we shake hands and part:

									 									You, as your business and desire shall point you;

									 									For every man has business and desire,

									 									Such as it is; and for mine own poor part,

									 									Look you, I’ll go pray.





						 							 Horatio 							 These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									I’m sorry they offend you, heartily;

									 									Yes, ’faith heartily.





						 							 Horatio 							 There’s no offence, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,

									 									And much offence too. Touching this vision here,

									 									It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you:

									 									For your desire to know what is between us,

									 									O’ermaster’t as you may. And now, good friends,

									 									As you are friends, scholars and soldiers,

									 									Give me one poor request.





						 							 Horatio 							 What is’t, my lord? we will.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Never make known what you have seen to-night.

						 							 Horatio

							Marcellus 							 My lord, we will not.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Nay, but swear’t.

						 							 Horatio 							 								 									In faith,

									 									My lord, not I.





						 							 Marcellus 							 Nor I, my lord, in faith.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Upon my sword.

						 							 Marcellus 							 We have sworn, my lord, already.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.

						 							 Ghost 							 Beneath. Swear.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Ah, ha, boy! say’st thou so? art thou there, truepenny?

									 									Come on—you hear this fellow in the cellarage—

									 									Consent to swear.





						 							 Horatio 							 Propose the oath, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Never to speak of this that you have seen,

									 									Swear by my sword.





						 							 Ghost 							 Beneath. Swear.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Hic et ubique? then we’ll shift our ground.

									 									Come hither, gentlemen,

									 									And lay your hands again upon my sword:

									 									Never to speak of this that you have heard,

									 									Swear by my sword.





						 							 Ghost 							 Beneath. Swear.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Well said, old mole! canst work i’ the earth so fast?

									 									A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.





						 							 Horatio 							 O day and night, but this is wondrous strange!

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.

									 									There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,

									 									Than are dreamt of in your philosophy.

									 									But come;

									 									Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,

									 									How strange or odd soe’er I bear myself,

									 									As I perchance hereafter shall think meet

									 									To put an antic disposition on,

									 									That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,

									 									With arms encumber’d thus, or this headshake,

									 									Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,

									 									As “Well, well, we know,” or “We could, an if we would,”

									 									Or “If we list to speak,” or “There be, an if they might,”

									 									Or such ambiguous giving out, to note

									 									That you know aught of me: this not to do,

									 									So grace and mercy at your most need help you,

									 									Swear.





						 							 Ghost 							 Beneath. Swear.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Rest, rest, perturbed spirit! They swear. So, gentlemen,

									 									With all my love I do commend me to you:

									 									And what so poor a man as Hamlet is

									 									May do, to express his love and friending to you,

									 									God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together;

									 									And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.

									 									The time is out of joint: O cursed spite,

									 									That ever I was born to set it right!

									 									Nay, come, let’s go together. Exeunt.
