				Act 				II




					Scene 					I


				A room in Polonius’ house.

				 					 						 							 							 								Enter Polonius and Reynaldo.

						 							 Polonius 							 Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.

						 							 Reynaldo 							 I will, my lord.

						 							 Polonius 							 								 									You shall do marvellous wisely, good Reynaldo,

									 									Before you visit him, to make inquire

									 									Of his behavior.





						 							 Reynaldo 							 My lord, I did intend it.

						 							 Polonius 							 								 									Marry, well said; very well said. Look you, sir,

									 									Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;

									 									And how, and who, what means, and where they keep,

									 									What company, at what expense; and finding

									 									By this encompassment and drift of question

									 									That they do know my son, come you more nearer

									 									Than your particular demands will touch it:

									 									Take you, as ’twere, some distant knowledge of him;

									 									As thus, “I know his father and his friends,

									 									And in part him:” do you mark this, Reynaldo?





						 							 Reynaldo 							 Ay, very well, my lord.

						 							 Polonius 							 								 									“And in part him; but” you may say “not well:

									 									But, if’t be he I mean, he’s very wild;

									 									Addicted so-and-so:” and there put on him

									 									What forgeries you please; marry, none so rank

									 									As may dishonour him; take heed of that;

									 									But, sir, such wanton, wild and usual slips

									 									As are companions noted and most known

									 									To youth and liberty.





						 							 Reynaldo 							 As gaming, my lord.

						 							 Polonius 							 								 									Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, quarrelling,

									 									Drabbing: you may go so far.





						 							 Reynaldo 							 My lord, that would dishonour him.

						 							 Polonius 							 								 									’Faith, no; as you may season it in the charge.

									 									You must not put another scandal on him,

									 									That he is open to incontinency;

									 									That’s not my meaning: but breathe his faults so quaintly

									 									That they may seem the taints of liberty,

									 									The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,

									 									A savageness in unreclaimed blood,

									 									Of general assault.





						 							 Reynaldo 							 But, my good lord—

						 							 Polonius 							 Wherefore should you do this?

						 							 Reynaldo 							 								 									Ay, my lord,

									 									I would know that.





						 							 Polonius 							 								 									Marry, sir, here’s my drift;

									 									And, I believe, it is a fetch of wit:

									 									You laying these slight sullies on my son,

									 									As ’twere a thing a little soil’d i’ the working,

									 									Mark you,

									 									Your party in converse, him you would sound,

									 									Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes

									 									The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured

									 									He closes with you in this consequence;

									 									“Good sir,” or so, or “friend,” or “gentleman,”

									 									According to the phrase or the addition

									 									Of man and country.





						 							 Reynaldo 							 Very good, my lord.

						 							 Polonius 							 And then, sir, does he this—he does—what was I about to say? By the mass, I was about to say something: where did I leave?

						 							 Reynaldo 							 At “closes in the consequence,” at “friend or so,” and “gentleman.”

						 							 Polonius 							 								 									At “closes in the consequence,” ay, marry;

									 									He closes thus: “I know the gentleman;

									 									I saw him yesterday, or t’ other day,

									 									Or then, or then; with such, or such; and, as you say,

									 									There was a’ gaming; there o’ertook in’s rouse;

									 									There falling out at tennis:” or perchance,

									 									“I saw him enter such a house of sale,”

									 									Videlicet, a brothel, or so forth.

									 									See you now;

									 									Your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth:

									 									And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,

									 									With windlasses and with assays of bias,

									 									By indirections find directions out:

									 									So by my former lecture and advice,

									 									Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?





						 							 Reynaldo 							 My lord, I have.

						 							 Polonius 							 God be wi’ you; fare you well.

						 							 Reynaldo 							 Good my lord!

						 							 Polonius 							 Observe his inclination in yourself.

						 							 Reynaldo 							 I shall, my lord.

						 							 Polonius 							 And let him ply his music.

						 							 Reynaldo 							 Well, my lord.

						 							 Polonius 							 Farewell! Exit Reynaldo.

						 							 							 								Enter Ophelia.

						 							 							 How now, Ophelia! what’s the matter?

						 							 Ophelia 							 O, my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!

						 							 Polonius 							 With what, i’ the name of God?

						 							 Ophelia 							 								 									My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,

									 									Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced;

									 									No hat upon his head; his stockings foul’d,

									 									Ungarter’d, and down-gyved to his ankle;

									 									Pale as his shirt; his knees knocking each other;

									 									And with a look so piteous in purport

									 									As if he had been loosed out of hell

									 									To speak of horrors—he comes before me.





						 							 Polonius 							 Mad for thy love?

						 							 Ophelia 							 								 									My lord, I do not know;

									 									But truly, I do fear it.





						 							 Polonius 							 What said he?

						 							 Ophelia 							 								 									He took me by the wrist and held me hard;

									 									Then goes he to the length of all his arm;

									 									And, with his other hand thus o’er his brow,

									 									He falls to such perusal of my face

									 									As he would draw it. Long stay’d he so;

									 									At last, a little shaking of mine arm

									 									And thrice his head thus waving up and down,

									 									He raised a sigh so piteous and profound

									 									As it did seem to shatter all his bulk

									 									And end his being: that done, he lets me go:

									 									And, with his head over his shoulder turn’d,

									 									He seem’d to find his way without his eyes;

									 									For out o’ doors he went without their helps,

									 									And, to the last, bended their light on me.





						 							 Polonius 							 								 									Come, go with me: I will go seek the king.

									 									This is the very ecstasy of love,

									 									Whose violent property fordoes itself

									 									And leads the will to desperate undertakings

									 									As oft as any passion under heaven

									 									That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.

									 									What, have you given him any hard words of late?





						 							 Ophelia 							 								 									No, my good lord, but, as you did command,

									 									I did repel his letters and denied

									 									His access to me.





						 							 Polonius 							 								 									That hath made him mad.

									 									I am sorry that with better heed and judgment

									 									I had not quoted him: I fear’d he did but trifle,

									 									And meant to wreck thee; but, beshrew my jealousy!

									 									By heaven, it is as proper to our age

									 									To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions

									 									As it is common for the younger sort

									 									To lack discretion. Come, go we to the king:

									 									This must be known; which, being kept close, might move

									 									More grief to hide than hate to utter love. Exeunt.





					Scene 					II


				A room in the castle.

				 					 						 							 							 								Enter King, Queen, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and Attendants.

						 							 King 							 								 									Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern!

									 									Moreover that we much did long to see you,

									 									The need we have to use you did provoke

									 									Our hasty sending. Something have you heard

									 									Of Hamlet’s transformation; so call it,

									 									Sith nor the exterior nor the inward man

									 									Resembles that it was. What it should be,

									 									More than his father’s death, that thus hath put him

									 									So much from the understanding of himself,

									 									I cannot dream of: I entreat you both,

									 									That, being of so young days brought up with him,

									 									And sith so neighbour’d to his youth and havior,

									 									That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court

									 									Some little time: so by your companies

									 									To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather,

									 									So much as from occasion you may glean,

									 									Whether aught, to us unknown, afflicts him thus,

									 									That, open’d, lies within our remedy.





						 							 Queen 							 								 									Good gentlemen, he hath much talk’d of you;

									 									And sure I am two men there are not living

									 									To whom he more adheres. If it will please you

									 									To show us so much gentry and good will

									 									As to expend your time with us awhile,

									 									For the supply and profit of our hope,

									 									Your visitation shall receive such thanks

									 									As fits a king’s remembrance.





						 							 Rosencrantz 							 								 									Both your majesties

									 									Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,

									 									Put your dread pleasures more into command

									 									Than to entreaty.





						 							 Guildenstern 							 								 									But we both obey,

									 									And here give up ourselves, in the full bent

									 									To lay our service freely at your feet,

									 									To be commanded.





						 							 King 							 Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.

						 							 Queen 							 								 									Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz:

									 									And I beseech you instantly to visit

									 									My too much changed son. Go, some of you,

									 									And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.





						 							 Guildenstern 							 								 									Heavens make our presence and our practices

									 									Pleasant and helpful to him!





						 							 Queen 							 Ay, amen! Exeunt Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and some Attendants.

						 							 							 								Enter Polonius.

						 							 Polonius 							 								 									The ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,

									 									Are joyfully return’d.





						 							 King 							 Thou still hast been the father of good news.

						 							 Polonius 							 								 									Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege,

									 									I hold my duty, as I hold my soul,

									 									Both to my God and to my gracious king:

									 									And I do think, or else this brain of mine

									 									Hunts not the trail of policy so sure

									 									As it hath used to do, that I have found

									 									The very cause of Hamlet’s lunacy.





						 							 King 							 O, speak of that; that do I long to hear.

						 							 Polonius 							 								 									Give first admittance to the ambassadors;

									 									My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.





						 							 King 							 								 									Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in. Exit Polonius.

									 									He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found

									 									The head and source of all your son’s distemper.





						 							 Queen 							 								 									I doubt it is no other but the main;

									 									His father’s death, and our o’erhasty marriage.





						 							 King 							 Well, we shall sift him.

						 							 							 								Reenter Polonius, with Voltimand and Cornelius.

						 							 							 								 									Welcome, my good friends!

									 									Say, Voltimand, what from our brother Norway?





						 							 Voltimand 							 								 									Most fair return of greetings and desires.

									 									Upon our first, he sent out to suppress

									 									His nephew’s levies; which to him appear’d

									 									To be a preparation ’gainst the Polack;

									 									But, better look’d into, he truly found

									 									It was against your highness: whereat grieved,

									 									That so his sickness, age and impotence

									 									Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests

									 									On Fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys;

									 									Receives rebuke from Norway, and in fine

									 									Makes vow before his uncle never more

									 									To give the assay of arms against your majesty.

									 									Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,

									 									Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee,

									 									And his commission to employ those soldiers,

									 									So levied as before, against the Polack:

									 									With an entreaty, herein further shown, Giving a paper.

									 									That it might please you to give quiet pass

									 									Through your dominions for this enterprise,

									 									On such regards of safety and allowance

									 									As therein are set down.





						 							 King 							 								 									It likes us well;

									 									And at our more consider’d time well read,

									 									Answer, and think upon this business.

									 									Meantime we thank you for your well-took labour:

									 									Go to your rest; at night we’ll feast together:

									 									Most welcome home! Exeunt Voltimand and Cornelius.





						 							 Polonius 							 								 									This business is well ended.

									 									My liege, and madam, to expostulate

									 									What majesty should be, what duty is,

									 									Why day is day, night night, and time is time,

									 									Were nothing but to waste night, day and time.

									 									Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,

									 									And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,

									 									I will be brief: your noble son is mad:

									 									Mad call I it; for, to define true madness,

									 									What is’t but to be nothing else but mad?

									 									But let that go.





						 							 Queen 							 More matter, with less art.

						 							 Polonius 							 								 									 										Madam, I swear I use no art at all.

										 										That he is mad, ’tis true: ’tis true ’tis pity;

										 										And pity ’tis ’tis true: a foolish figure;

										 										But farewell it, for I will use no art.

										 										Mad let us grant him, then: and now remains

										 										That we find out the cause of this effect,

										 										Or rather say, the cause of this defect,

										 										For this effect defective comes by cause:

										 										Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.

										 										Perpend.

										 										I have a daughter—have while she is mine—

										 										Who, in her duty and obedience, mark,

										 										Hath given me this: now gather, and surmise. Reads.





								 									“To the celestial and my soul’s idol, the most beautified Ophelia,”—



								That’s an ill phrase, a vile phrase; “beautified” is a vile phrase: but you shall hear. Thus: Reads.

								 									“In her excellent white bosom, these, etc.”





						 							 Queen 							 Came this from Hamlet to her?

						 							 Polonius 							 								Good madam, stay awhile; I will be faithful. Reads.

								 									 										 											“Doubt thou the stars are fire;

											 											Doubt that the sun doth move;

											 											Doubt truth to be a liar;

											 											But never doubt I love.





									“O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers; I have not art to reckon my groans: but that I love thee best, O most best, believe it. Adieu.

									“Thine evermore most dear lady, whilst this machine is to him, Hamlet.”



								 									 										This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me,

										 										And more above, hath his solicitings,

										 										As they fell out by time, by means and place,

										 										All given to mine ear.





						 							 King 							 								 									But how hath she

									 									Received his love?





						 							 Polonius 							 What do you think of me?

						 							 King 							 As of a man faithful and honourable.

						 							 Polonius 							 								 									I would fain prove so. But what might you think,

									 									When I had seen this hot love on the wing—

									 									As I perceived it, I must tell you that,

									 									Before my daughter told me—what might you,

									 									Or my dear majesty your queen here, think,

									 									If I had play’d the desk or table-book,

									 									Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,

									 									Or look’d upon this love with idle sight;

									 									What might you think? No, I went round to work,

									 									And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:

									 									“Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star;

									 									This must not be:” and then I precepts gave her,

									 									That she should lock herself from his resort,

									 									Admit no messengers, receive no tokens.

									 									Which done, she took the fruits of my advice;

									 									And he, repulsed—a short tale to make—

									 									Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,

									 									Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,

									 									Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,

									 									Into the madness wherein now he raves,

									 									And all we mourn for.





						 							 King 							 Do you think ’tis this?

						 							 Queen 							 It may be, very likely.

						 							 Polonius 							 								 									Hath there been such a time—I’d fain know that—

									 									That I have positively said “ ’Tis so,”

									 									When it proved otherwise?





						 							 King 							 Not that I know.

						 							 Polonius 							 								 									Pointing to his head and shoulder. Take this from this, if this be otherwise:

									 									If circumstances lead me, I will find

									 									Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed

									 									Within the centre.





						 							 King 							 How may we try it further?

						 							 Polonius 							 								 									You know, sometimes he walks four hours together

									 									Here in the lobby.





						 							 Queen 							 So he does indeed.

						 							 Polonius 							 								 									At such a time I’ll loose my daughter to him:

									 									Be you and I behind an arras then;

									 									Mark the encounter: if he love her not

									 									And be not from his reason fall’n thereon,

									 									Let me be no assistant for a state,

									 									But keep a farm and carters.





						 							 King 							 We will try it.

						 							 Queen 							 But, look, where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.

						 							 Polonius 							 								 									Away, I do beseech you, both away:

									 									I’ll board him presently. Exeunt King, Queen, and Attendants.





						 							 							 								Enter Hamlet, reading.

						 							 							 								 									O, give me leave:

									 									How does my good Lord Hamlet?





						 							 Hamlet 							 Well, God-a-mercy.

						 							 Polonius 							 Do you know me, my lord?

						 							 Hamlet 							 Excellent well; you are a fishmonger.

						 							 Polonius 							 Not I, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Then I would you were so honest a man.

						 							 Polonius 							 Honest, my lord!

						 							 Hamlet 							 Ay, sir; to be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man picked out of ten thousand.

						 							 Polonius 							 That’s very true, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a god kissing carrion—Have you a daughter?

						 							 Polonius 							 I have, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Let her not walk i’ the sun: conception is a blessing: but not as your daughter may conceive. Friend, look to’t.

						 							 Polonius 							 Aside. How say you by that? Still harping on my daughter: yet he knew me not at first; he said I was a fishmonger: he is far gone, far gone: and truly in my youth I suffered much extremity for love; very near this. I’ll speak to him again. What do you read, my lord?

						 							 Hamlet 							 Words, words, words.

						 							 Polonius 							 What is the matter, my lord?

						 							 Hamlet 							 Between who?

						 							 Polonius 							 I mean, the matter that you read, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Slanders, sir: for the satirical rogue says here that old men have grey beards, that their faces are wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and plum-tree gum and that they have a plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak hams: all which, sir, though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I hold it not honesty to have it thus set down, for yourself, sir, should be old as I am, if like a crab you could go backward.

						 							 Polonius 							 Aside. Though this be madness, yet there is method in’t. Will you walk out of the air, my lord?

						 							 Hamlet 							 Into my grave.

						 							 Polonius 							 Indeed, that is out o’ the air. Aside. How pregnant sometimes his replies are! a happiness that often madness hits on, which reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I will leave him, and suddenly contrive the means of meeting between him and my daughter.—My honourable lord, I will most humbly take my leave of you.

						 							 Hamlet 							 You cannot, sir, take from me any thing that I will more willingly part withal: except my life, except my life, except my life.

						 							 Polonius 							 Fare you well, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 These tedious old fools!

						 							 							 								Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

						 							 Polonius 							 You go to seek the Lord Hamlet; there he is.

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 To Polonius. God save you, sir! Exit Polonius.

						 							 Guildenstern 							 My honoured lord!

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 My most dear lord!

						 							 Hamlet 							 My excellent good friends! How dost thou, Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do ye both?

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 As the indifferent children of the earth.

						 							 Guildenstern 							 								 									Happy, in that we are not over-happy;

									 									On fortune’s cap we are not the very button.





						 							 Hamlet 							 Nor the soles of her shoe?

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 Neither, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her favours?

						 							 Guildenstern 							 ’Faith, her privates we.

						 							 Hamlet 							 In the secret parts of fortune? O, most true; she is a strumpet. What’s the news?

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 None, my lord, but that the world’s grown honest.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Then is doomsday near: but your news is not true. Let me question more in particular: what have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of fortune, that she sends you to prison hither?

						 							 Guildenstern 							 Prison, my lord!

						 							 Hamlet 							 Denmark’s a prison.

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 Then is the world one.

						 							 Hamlet 							 A goodly one; in which there are many confines, wards and dungeons, Denmark being one o’ the worst.

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 We think not so, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Why, then, ’tis none to you; for there is nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so: to me it is a prison.

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 Why then, your ambition makes it one; ’tis too narrow for your mind.

						 							 Hamlet 							 O God, I could be bounded in a nut-shell and count myself a king of infinite space, were it not that I have bad dreams.

						 							 Guildenstern 							 Which dreams indeed are ambition, for the very substance of the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.

						 							 Hamlet 							 A dream itself is but a shadow.

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light a quality that it is but a shadow’s shadow.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and outstretched heroes the beggars’ shadows. Shall we to the court? for, by my fay, I cannot reason.

						 							 Rosencrantz

							Guildenstern 							 We’ll wait upon you.

						 							 Hamlet 							 No such matter: I will not sort you with the rest of my servants, for, to speak to you like an honest man, I am most dreadfully attended. But, in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at Elsinore?

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 To visit you, my lord; no other occasion.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; but I thank you: and sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent for? Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation? Come, deal justly with me: come, come; nay, speak.

						 							 Guildenstern 							 What should we say, my lord?

						 							 Hamlet 							 Why, any thing, but to the purpose. You were sent for; and there is a kind of confession in your looks which your modesties have not craft enough to colour: I know the good king and queen have sent for you.

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 To what end, my lord?

						 							 Hamlet 							 That you must teach me. But let me conjure you, by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved love, and by what more dear a better proposer could charge you withal, be even and direct with me, whether you were sent for, or no?

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 Aside to Guildenstern. What say you?

						 							 Hamlet 							 Aside. Nay, then, I have an eye of you.—If you love me, hold not off.

						 							 Guildenstern 							 My lord, we were sent for.

						 							 Hamlet 							 I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the king and queen moult no feather. I have of late—but wherefore I know not—lost all my mirth, forgone all custom of exercises; and indeed it goes so heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame, the earth, seems to me a sterile promontory, this most excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o’erhanging firmament, this majestical roof fretted with golden fire, why, it appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours. What a piece of work is a man! how noble in reason! how infinite in faculty! in form and moving how express and admirable! in action how like an angel! in apprehension how like a god! the beauty of the world! the paragon of animals! And yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust? man delights not me: no, nor woman neither, though by your smiling you seem to say so.

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 My lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Why did you laugh then, when I said “man delights not me”?

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what lenten entertainment the players shall receive from you: we coted them on the way; and hither are they coming, to offer you service.

						 							 Hamlet 							 He that plays the king shall be welcome; his majesty shall have tribute of me; the adventurous knight shall use his foil and target; the lover shall not sigh gratis; the humourous man shall end his part in peace; the clown shall make those laugh whose lungs are tickled o’ the sere; and the lady shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall halt for’t. What players are they?

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 Even those you were wont to take delight in, the tragedians of the city.

						 							 Hamlet 							 How chances it they travel? their residence, both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late innovation.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Do they hold the same estimation they did when I was in the city? are they so followed?

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 No, indeed, are they not.

						 							 Hamlet 							 How comes it? do they grow rusty?

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace: but there is, sir, an aery of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top of question, and are most tyrannically clapped for’t: these are now the fashion, and so berattle the common stages—so they call them—that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goose-quills and dare scarce come thither.

						 							 Hamlet 							 What, are they children? who maintains ’em? how are they escoted? Will they pursue the quality no longer than they can sing? will they not say afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common players—as it is most like, if their means are no better—their writers do them wrong, to make them exclaim against their own succession?

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 ’Faith, there has been much to do on both sides; and the nation holds it no sin to tarre them to controversy: there was, for a while, no money bid for argument, unless the poet and the player went to cuffs in the question.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Is’t possible?

						 							 Guildenstern 							 O, there has been much throwing about of brains.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Do the boys carry it away?

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 Ay, that they do, my lord; Hercules and his load too.

						 							 Hamlet 							 It is not very strange; for mine uncle is king of Denmark, and those that would make mows at him while my father lived, give twenty, forty, fifty, an hundred ducats a-piece for his picture in little. ’Sblood, there is something in this more than natural, if philosophy could find it out. Flourish of trumpets within.

						 							 Guildenstern 							 There are the players.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore. Your hands, come then: the appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony: let me comply with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players, which, I tell you, must show fairly outward, should more appear like entertainment than yours. You are welcome: but my uncle-father and aunt-mother are deceived.

						 							 Guildenstern 							 In what, my dear lord?

						 							 Hamlet 							 I am but mad north-north-west: when the wind is southerly I know a hawk from a handsaw.

						 							 							 								Reenter Polonius.

						 							 Polonius 							 Well be with you, gentlemen!

						 							 Hamlet 							 Hark you, Guildenstern; and you too: at each ear a hearer: that great baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling-clouts.

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 Happily he’s the second time come to them; for they say an old man is twice a child.

						 							 Hamlet 							 I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players; mark it. You say right, sir: o’ Monday morning; ’twas so indeed.

						 							 Polonius 							 My lord, I have news to tell you.

						 							 Hamlet 							 My lord, I have news to tell you. When Roscius was an actor in Rome—

						 							 Polonius 							 The actors are come hither, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Buz, buz!

						 							 Polonius 							 Upon mine honour—

						 							 Hamlet 							 Then came each actor on his ass—

						 							 Polonius 							 The best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral, tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or poem unlimited: Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty, these are the only men.

						 							 Hamlet 							 O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou!

						 							 Polonius 							 What a treasure had he, my lord?

						 							 Hamlet 							 								Why,

								 									 										“One fair daughter and no more,

										 										The which he loved passing well.”





						 							 Polonius 							 Aside. Still on my daughter.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Am I not i’ the right, old Jephthah?

						 							 Polonius 							 If you call me Jephthah, my lord, I have a daughter that I love passing well.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Nay, that follows not.

						 							 Polonius 							 What follows, then, my lord?

						 							 Hamlet 							 								Why,

								 									 										“As by lot, God wot,”





								and then, you know,

								 									 										“It came to pass, as most like it was,”—





								the first row of the pious chanson will show you more; for look, where my abridgement comes.



						 							 							 								Enter four or five Players.

						 							 							 You are welcome, masters; welcome, all. I am glad to see thee well. Welcome, good friends. O, my old friend! thy face is valanced since I saw thee last: comest thou to beard me in Denmark? What, my young lady and mistress! By’r lady, your ladyship is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by the altitude of a chopine. Pray God, your voice, like apiece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the ring. Masters, you are all welcome. We’ll e’en to’t like French falconers, fly at any thing we see: we’ll have a speech straight: come, give us a taste of your quality; come, a passionate speech.

						 							 First Player 							 What speech, my lord?

						 							 Hamlet 							 								I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted; or, if it was, not above once; for the play, I remember, pleased not the million; ’twas caviare to the general: but it was—as I received it, and others, whose judgments in such matters cried in the top of mine—an excellent play, well digested in the scenes, set down with as much modesty as cunning. I remember, one said there were no sallets in the lines to make the matter savoury, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict the author of affectation; but called it an honest method, as wholesome as sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine. One speech in it I chiefly loved: ’twas Aeneas’ tale to Dido; and thereabout of it especially, where he speaks of Priam’s slaughter: if it live in your memory, begin at this line: let me see, let me see—

								 									 										“The rugged Pyrrhus, like the Hyrcanian beast,”





								—it is not so:—it begins with Pyrrhus:—

								 									 										“The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,

										 										Black as his purpose, did the night resemble

										 										When he lay couched in the ominous horse,

										 										Hath now this dread and black complexion smear’d

										 										With heraldry more dismal; head to foot

										 										Now is he total gules; horridly trick’d

										 										With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,

										 										Baked and impasted with the parching streets,

										 										That lend a tyrannous and damned light

										 										To their lord’s murder: roasted in wrath and fire,

										 										And thus o’er-sized with coagulate gore,

										 										With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus

										 										Old grandsire Priam seeks.”





								So, proceed you.



						 							 Polonius 							 ’Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good discretion.

						 							 First Player 							 								 									 										“Anon he finds him

										 										Striking too short at Greeks; his antique sword,

										 										Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,

										 										Repugnant to command: unequal match’d,

										 										Pyrrhus at Priam drives; in rage strikes wide;

										 										But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword

										 										The unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,

										 										Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top

										 										Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash

										 										Takes prisoner Pyrrhus’ ear: for, lo! his sword,

										 										Which was declining on the milky head

										 										Of reverend Priam, seem’d i’ the air to stick:

										 										So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood,

										 										And like a neutral to his will and matter,

										 										Did nothing.

										 										But, as we often see, against some storm,

										 										A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,

										 										The bold winds speechless and the orb below

										 										As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder

										 										Doth rend the region, so, after Pyrrhus’ pause,

										 										Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work;

										 										And never did the Cyclops’ hammers fall

										 										On Mars’s armour forged for proof eterne

										 										With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword

										 										Now falls on Priam.

										 										Out, out, thou strumpet, Fortune! All you gods,

										 										In general synod take away her power;

										 										Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,

										 										And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven,

										 										As low as to the fiends!”





						 							 Polonius 							 This is too long.

						 							 Hamlet 							 It shall to the barber’s, with your beard. Prithee, say on: he’s for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps: say on: come to Hecuba.

						 							 First Player 							 “But who, O, who had seen the mobled queen—”

						 							 Hamlet 							 “The mobled queen?”

						 							 Polonius 							 That’s good; “mobled queen” is good.

						 							 First Player 							 								 									 										“Run barefoot up and down, threatening the flames

										 										With bisson rheum; a clout upon that head

										 										Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,

										 										About her lank and all o’er-teemed loins,

										 										A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up;

										 										Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep’d,

										 										’Gainst Fortune’s state would treason have pronounced:

										 										But if the gods themselves did see her then

										 										When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport

										 										In mincing with his sword her husband’s limbs,

										 										The instant burst of clamour that she made,

										 										Unless things mortal move them not at all,

										 										Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven,

										 										And passion in the gods.”





						 							 Polonius 							 Look, whether he has not turned his colour and has tears in’s eyes. Pray you, no more.

						 							 Hamlet 							 ’Tis well; I’ll have thee speak out the rest soon. Good my lord, will you see the players well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used; for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the time: after your death you were better have a bad epitaph than their ill report while you live.

						 							 Polonius 							 My lord, I will use them according to their desert.

						 							 Hamlet 							 God’s bodykins, man, much better: use every man after his desert, and who should ’scape whipping? Use them after your own honour and dignity: the less they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty. Take them in.

						 							 Polonius 							 Come, sirs.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Follow him, friends: we’ll hear a play to-morrow. Exit Polonius with all the Players but the First. Dost thou hear me, old friend; can you play the Murder of Gonzago?

						 							 First Player 							 Ay, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 We’ll ha’t to-morrow night. You could, for a need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen lines, which I would set down and insert in’t, could you not?

						 							 First Player 							 Ay, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Very well. Follow that lord; and look you mock him not. Exit First Player. My good friends, I’ll leave you till night: you are welcome to Elsinore.

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 Good my lord!

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Ay, so, God be wi’ ye; Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. Now I am alone.

									 									O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!

									 									Is it not monstrous that this player here,

									 									But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,

									 									Could force his soul so to his own conceit

									 									That from her working all his visage wann’d,

									 									Tears in his eyes, distraction in’s aspect,

									 									A broken voice, and his whole function suiting

									 									With forms to his conceit? and all for nothing!

									 									For Hecuba!

									 									What’s Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,

									 									That he should weep for her? What would he do,

									 									Had he the motive and the cue for passion

									 									That I have? He would drown the stage with tears

									 									And cleave the general ear with horrid speech,

									 									Make mad the guilty and appal the free,

									 									Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed

									 									The very faculties of eyes and ears.

									 									Yet I,

									 									A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak,

									 									Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,

									 									And can say nothing; no, not for a king,

									 									Upon whose property and most dear life

									 									A damn’d defeat was made. Am I a coward?

									 									Who calls me villain? breaks my pate across?

									 									Plucks off my beard, and blows it in my face?

									 									Tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i’ the throat,

									 									As deep as to the lungs? who does me this?

									 									Ha!

									 									’Swounds, I should take it: for it cannot be

									 									But I am pigeon-liver’d and lack gall

									 									To make oppression bitter, or ere this

									 									I should have fatted all the region kites

									 									With this slave’s offal: bloody, bawdy villain!

									 									Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain!

									 									O, vengeance!

									 									Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,

									 									That I, the son of a dear father murder’d,

									 									Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,

									 									Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words,

									 									And fall a-cursing, like a very drab,

									 									A scullion!

									 									Fie upon’t! foh! About, my brain! I have heard

									 									That guilty creatures sitting at a play

									 									Have by the very cunning of the scene

									 									Been struck so to the soul that presently

									 									They have proclaim’d their malefactions;

									 									For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak

									 									With most miraculous organ. I’ll have these players

									 									Play something like the murder of my father

									 									Before mine uncle: I’ll observe his looks;

									 									I’ll tent him to the quick: if he but blench,

									 									I know my course. The spirit that I have seen

									 									May be the devil: and the devil hath power

									 									To assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps

									 									Out of my weakness and my melancholy,

									 									As he is very potent with such spirits,

									 									Abuses me to damn me: I’ll have grounds

									 									More relative than this: the play’s the thing

									 									Wherein I’ll catch the conscience of the king. Exit.