					Scene 					III


				A room in the castle.

				 					 						 							 							 								Enter King, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.

						 							 King 							 								 									I like him not, nor stands it safe with us

									 									To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you;

									 									I your commission will forthwith dispatch,

									 									And he to England shall along with you:

									 									The terms of our estate may not endure

									 									Hazard so dangerous as doth hourly grow

									 									Out of his lunacies.





						 							 Guildenstern 							 								 									We will ourselves provide:

									 									Most holy and religious fear it is

									 									To keep those many many bodies safe

									 									That live and feed upon your majesty.





						 							 Rosencrantz 							 								 									The single and peculiar life is bound,

									 									With all the strength and armour of the mind,

									 									To keep itself from noyance; but much more

									 									That spirit upon whose weal depend and rest

									 									The lives of many. The cease of majesty

									 									Dies not alone; but, like a gulf, doth draw

									 									What’s near it with it: it is a massy wheel,

									 									Fix’d on the summit of the highest mount,

									 									To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things

									 									Are mortised and adjoin’d; which, when it falls,

									 									Each small annexment, petty consequence,

									 									Attends the boisterous ruin. Never alone

									 									Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.





						 							 King 							 								 									Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage;

									 									For we will fetters put upon this fear,

									 									Which now goes too free-footed.





						 							 Rosencrantz

							Guildenstern 							 We will haste us. Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

						 							 							 								Enter Polonius.

						 							 Polonius 							 								 									My lord, he’s going to his mother’s closet:

									 									Behind the arras I’ll convey myself,

									 									To hear the process; and warrant she’ll tax him home:

									 									And, as you said, and wisely was it said,

									 									’Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,

									 									Since nature makes them partial, should o’erhear

									 									The speech, of vantage. Fare you well, my liege:

									 									I’ll call upon you ere you go to bed,

									 									And tell you what I know.





						 							 King 							 								 									Thanks, dear my lord. Exit Polonius.

									 									O, my offence is rank, it smells to heaven;

									 									It hath the primal eldest curse upon’t,

									 									A brother’s murder. Pray can I not,

									 									Though inclination be as sharp as will:

									 									My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent;

									 									And, like a man to double business bound,

									 									I stand in pause where I shall first begin,

									 									And both neglect. What if this cursed hand

									 									Were thicker than itself with brother’s blood,

									 									Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens

									 									To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy

									 									But to confront the visage of offence?

									 									And what’s in prayer but this two-fold force,

									 									To be forestalled ere we come to fall,

									 									Or pardon’d being down? Then I’ll look up;

									 									My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer

									 									Can serve my turn? “Forgive me my foul murder”?

									 									That cannot be; since I am still possess’d

									 									Of those effects for which I did the murder,

									 									My crown, mine own ambition and my queen.

									 									May one be pardon’d and retain the offence?

									 									In the corrupted currents of this world

									 									Offence’s gilded hand may shove by justice,

									 									And oft ’tis seen the wicked prize itself

									 									Buys out the law: but ’tis not so above;

									 									There is no shuffling, there the action lies

									 									In his true nature; and we ourselves compell’d,

									 									Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,

									 									To give in evidence. What then? what rests?

									 									Try what repentance can: what can it not?

									 									Yet what can it when one can not repent?

									 									O wretched state! O bosom black as death!

									 									O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,

									 									Art more engaged! Help, angels! Make assay!

									 									Bow, stubborn knees; and, heart with strings of steel,

									 									Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe!

									 									All may be well. Retires and kneels.





						 							 							 								Enter Hamlet.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Now might I do it pat, now he is praying;

									 									And now I’ll do’t. And so he goes to heaven;

									 									And so am I revenged. That would be scann’d:

									 									A villain kills my father; and for that,

									 									I, his sole son, do this same villain send

									 									To heaven.

									 									O, this is hire and salary, not revenge.

									 									He took my father grossly, full of bread;

									 									With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;

									 									And how his audit stands who knows save heaven?

									 									But in our circumstance and course of thought,

									 									’Tis heavy with him: and am I then revenged,

									 									To take him in the purging of his soul,

									 									When he is fit and season’d for his passage?

									 									No!

									 									Up, sword; and know thou a more horrid hent:

									 									When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,

									 									Or in the incestuous pleasure of his bed;

									 									At gaming, swearing, or about some act

									 									That has no relish of salvation in’t;

									 									Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,

									 									And that his soul may be as damn’d and black

									 									As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays:

									 									This physic but prolongs thy sickly days. Exit.





						 							 King 							 								 									Rising. My words fly up, my thoughts remain below:

									 									Words without thoughts never to heaven go. Exit.





					Scene 					IV


				The Queen’s closet.

				 					 						 							 							 								Enter Queen and Polonius.

						 							 Polonius 							 								 									He will come straight. Look you lay home to him:

									 									Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with,

									 									And that your grace hath screen’d and stood between

									 									Much heat and him. I’ll sconce me even here.

									 									Pray you, be round with him.





						 							 Hamlet 							 Within. Mother, mother, mother!

						 							 Queen 							 								 									I’ll warrant you,

									 									Fear me not: withdraw, I hear him coming. Polonius hides behind the arras.





						 							 							 								Enter Hamlet.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Now, mother, what’s the matter?

						 							 Queen 							 Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Mother, you have my father much offended.

						 							 Queen 							 Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.

						 							 Queen 							 Why, how now, Hamlet!

						 							 Hamlet 							 What’s the matter now?

						 							 Queen 							 Have you forgot me?

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									No, by the rood, not so:

									 									You are the queen, your husband’s brother’s wife;

									 									And—would it were not so!—you are my mother.





						 							 Queen 							 Nay, then, I’ll set those to you that can speak.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Come, come, and sit you down; you shall not budge;

									 									You go not till I set you up a glass

									 									Where you may see the inmost part of you.





						 							 Queen 							 								 									What wilt thou do? thou wilt not murder me?

									 									Help, help, ho!





						 							 Polonius 							 Behind. What, ho! help, help, help!

						 							 Hamlet 							 Drawing. How now! a rat? Dead, for a ducat, dead! Makes a pass through the arras.

						 							 Polonius 							 Behind. O, I am slain! Falls and dies.

						 							 Queen 							 O me, what hast thou done?

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Nay, I know not:

									 									Is it the king?





						 							 Queen 							 O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									A bloody deed! almost as bad, good mother,

									 									As kill a king, and marry with his brother.





						 							 Queen 							 As kill a king!

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Ay, lady, ’twas my word. Lifts up the arras and discovers Polonius.

									 									Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell!

									 									I took thee for thy better: take thy fortune;

									 									Thou find’st to be too busy is some danger.

									 									Leave wringing of your hands: peace! sit you down,

									 									And let me wring your heart; for so I shall,

									 									If it be made of penetrable stuff,

									 									If damned custom have not brass’d it so

									 									That it be proof and bulwark against sense.





						 							 Queen 							 								 									What have I done, that thou darest wag thy tongue

									 									In noise so rude against me?





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Such an act

									 									That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,

									 									Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose

									 									From the fair forehead of an innocent love

									 									And sets a blister there, makes marriage-vows

									 									As false as dicers’ oaths: O, such a deed

									 									As from the body of contraction plucks

									 									The very soul, and sweet religion makes

									 									A rhapsody of words: heaven’s face doth glow;

									 									Yea, this solidity and compound mass,

									 									With tristful visage, as against the doom,

									 									Is thought-sick at the act.





						 							 Queen 							 								 									Ay me, what act,

									 									That roars so loud, and thunders in the index?





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Look here, upon this picture, and on this,

									 									The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.

									 									See, what a grace was seated on this brow;

									 									Hyperion’s curls; the front of Jove himself;

									 									An eye like Mars, to threaten and command;

									 									A station like the herald Mercury

									 									New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill;

									 									A combination and a form indeed,

									 									Where every god did seem to set his seal,

									 									To give the world assurance of a man:

									 									This was your husband. Look you now, what follows:

									 									Here is your husband; like a mildew’d ear,

									 									Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?

									 									Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,

									 									And batten on this moor? Ha! have you eyes?

									 									You cannot call it love; for at your age

									 									The hey-day in the blood is tame, it’s humble,

									 									And waits upon the judgment: and what judgment

									 									Would step from this to this? Sense, sure, you have,

									 									Else could you not have motion; but sure, that sense

									 									Is apoplex’d; for madness would not err,

									 									Nor sense to ecstasy was ne’er so thrall’d

									 									But it reserved some quantity of choice,

									 									To serve in such a difference. What devil was’t

									 									That thus hath cozen’d you at hoodman-blind?

									 									Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,

									 									Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,

									 									Or but a sickly part of one true sense

									 									Could not so mope.

									 									O shame! where is thy blush? Rebellious hell,

									 									If thou canst mutine in a matron’s bones,

									 									To flaming youth let virtue be as wax,

									 									And melt in her own fire: proclaim no shame

									 									When the compulsive ardour gives the charge,

									 									Since frost itself as actively doth burn

									 									And reason panders will.





						 							 Queen 							 								 									O Hamlet, speak no more:

									 									Thou turn’st mine eyes into my very soul;

									 									And there I see such black and grained spots

									 									As will not leave their tinct.





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Nay, but to live

									 									In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,

									 									Stew’d in corruption, honeying and making love

									 									Over the nasty sty—





						 							 Queen 							 								 									O, speak to me no more;

									 									These words, like daggers, enter in mine ears;

									 									No more, sweet Hamlet!





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									A murderer and a villain;

									 									A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe

									 									Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings;

									 									A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,

									 									That from a shelf the precious diadem stole,

									 									And put it in his pocket!





						 							 Queen 							 No more!

						 							 Hamlet 							 A king of shreds and patches—

						 							 							 								Enter Ghost.

						 							 							 								 									Save me, and hover o’er me with your wings,

									 									You heavenly guards! What would your gracious figure?





						 							 Queen 							 Alas, he’s mad!

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Do you not come your tardy son to chide,

									 									That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by

									 									The important acting of your dread command?

									 									O, say!





						 							 Ghost 							 								 									Do not forget: this visitation

									 									Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.

									 									But, look, amazement on thy mother sits:

									 									O, step between her and her fighting soul:

									 									Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works:

									 									Speak to her, Hamlet.





						 							 Hamlet 							 How is it with you, lady?

						 							 Queen 							 								 									Alas, how is’t with you,

									 									That you do bend your eye on vacancy

									 									And with the incorporal air do hold discourse?

									 									Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep;

									 									And, as the sleeping soldiers in the alarm,

									 									Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,

									 									Start up, and stand an end. O gentle son,

									 									Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper

									 									Sprinkle cool patience. Whereon do you look?





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									On him, on him! Look you, how pale he glares!

									 									His form and cause conjoin’d, preaching to stones,

									 									Would make them capable. Do not look upon me;

									 									Lest with this piteous action you convert

									 									My stern effects: then what I have to do

									 									Will want true colour; tears perchance for blood.





						 							 Queen 							 To whom do you speak this?

						 							 Hamlet 							 Do you see nothing there?

						 							 Queen 							 Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Nor did you nothing hear?

						 							 Queen 							 No, nothing but ourselves.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Why, look you there! look, how it steals away!

									 									My father, in his habit as he lived!

									 									Look, where he goes, even now, out at the portal! Exit Ghost.





						 							 Queen 							 								 									This the very coinage of your brain:

									 									This bodiless creation ecstasy

									 									Is very cunning in.





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Ecstasy!

									 									My pulse, as yours, doth temperately keep time,

									 									And makes as healthful music: it is not madness

									 									That I have utter’d: bring me to the test,

									 									And I the matter will re-word; which madness

									 									Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,

									 									Lay not that flattering unction to your soul,

									 									That not your trespass, but my madness speaks:

									 									It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,

									 									Whilst rank corruption, mining all within,

									 									Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven;

									 									Repent what’s past; avoid what is to come;

									 									And do not spread the compost on the weeds,

									 									To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue;

									 									For in the fatness of these pursy times

									 									Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,

									 									Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.





						 							 Queen 							 O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									O, throw away the worser part of it,

									 									And live the purer with the other half.

									 									Good night: but go not to mine uncle’s bed;

									 									Assume a virtue, if you have it not.

									 									That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat,

									 									Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,

									 									That to the use of actions fair and good

									 									He likewise gives a frock or livery,

									 									That aptly is put on. Refrain to-night,

									 									And that shall lend a kind of easiness

									 									To the next abstinence: the next more easy;

									 									For use almost can change the stamp of nature,

									 									And either master1 the devil, or throw him out

									 									With wondrous potency. Once more, good night:

									 									And when you are desirous to be bless’d,

									 									I’ll blessing beg of you. For this same lord, Pointing to Polonius.

									 									I do repent: but heaven hath pleased it so,

									 									To punish me with this and this with me,

									 									That I must be their scourge and minister.

									 									I will bestow him, and will answer well

									 									The death I gave him. So, again, good night.

									 									I must be cruel, only to be kind:

									 									Thus bad begins and worse remains behind.

									 									One word more, good lady.





						 							 Queen 							 What shall I do?

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Not this, by no means, that I bid you do:

									 									Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed;

									 									Pinch wanton on your cheek; call you his mouse;

									 									And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses,

									 									Or paddling in your neck with his damn’d fingers,

									 									Make you to ravel all this matter out,

									 									That I essentially am not in madness,

									 									But mad in craft. ’Twere good you let him know;

									 									For who, that’s but a queen, fair, sober, wise,

									 									Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,

									 									Such dear concernings hide? who would do so?

									 									No, in despite of sense and secrecy,

									 									Unpeg the basket on the house’s top,

									 									Let the birds fly, and, like the famous ape,

									 									To try conclusions, in the basket creep,

									 									And break your own neck down.





						 							 Queen 							 								 									Be thou assured, if words be made of breath,

									 									And breath of life, I have no life to breathe

									 									What thou hast said to me.





						 							 Hamlet 							 I must to England; you know that?

						 							 Queen 							 								 									Alack,

									 									I had forgot: ’tis so concluded on.





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									There’s letters seal’d: and my two schoolfellows,

									 									Whom I will trust as I will adders fang’d,

									 									They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way,

									 									And marshal me to knavery. Let it work;

									 									For ’tis the sport to have the enginer

									 									Hoist with his own petar: and’t shall go hard

									 									But I will delve one yard below their mines,

									 									And blow them at the moon: O, ’tis most sweet,

									 									When in one line two crafts directly meet.

									 									This man shall set me packing:

									 									I’ll lug the guts into the neighbour room.

									 									Mother, good night. Indeed this counsellor

									 									Is now most still, most secret and most grave,

									 									Who was in life a foolish prating knave.

									 									Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.

									 									Good night, mother. Exeunt severally; Hamlet dragging in Polonius.





				Act 				IV




					Scene 					I


				A room in the castle.

				 					 						 							 							 								Enter King, Queen, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.

						 							 King 							 								 									There’s matter in these sighs, these profound heaves:

									 									You must translate: ’tis fit we understand them.

									 									Where is your son?





						 							 Queen 							 								 									Bestow this place on us a little while. Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

									 									Ah, mine good lord, what have I seen to-night!





						 							 King 							 What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?

						 							 Queen 							 								 									Mad as the sea and wind, when both contend

									 									Which is the mightier: in his lawless fit,

									 									Behind the arras hearing something stir,

									 									Whips out his rapier, cries, “A rat, a rat!”

									 									And, in this brainish apprehension, kills

									 									The unseen good old man.





						 							 King 							 								 									O heavy deed!

									 									It had been so with us, had we been there:

									 									His liberty is full of threats to all;

									 									To you yourself, to us, to every one.

									 									Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answer’d?

									 									It will be laid to us, whose providence

									 									Should have kept short, restrain’d and out of haunt,

									 									This mad young man: but so much was our love,

									 									We would not understand what was most fit;

									 									But, like the owner of a foul disease,

									 									To keep it from divulging, let it feed

									 									Even on the pith of Life. Where is he gone?





						 							 Queen 							 								 									To draw apart the body he hath kill’d:

									 									O’er whom his very madness, like some ore

									 									Among a mineral of metals base,

									 									Shows itself pure; he weeps for what is done.





						 							 King 							 								 									O Gertrude, come away!

									 									The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch,

									 									But we will ship him hence: and this vile deed

									 									We must, with all our majesty and skill,

									 									Both countenance and excuse. Ho, Guildenstern!





						 							 							 								Reenter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

						 							 							 								 									Friends both, go join you with some further aid:

									 									Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,

									 									And from his mother’s closet hath he dragg’d him:

									 									Go seek him out; speak fair, and bring the body

									 									Into the chapel. I pray you, haste in this. Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

									 									Come, Gertrude, we’ll call up our wisest friends;

									 									And let them know, both what we mean to do,

									 									And what’s untimely done. So haply slander—2

									 									Whose whisper o’er the world’s diameter,

									 									As level as the canon to his blank,

									 									Transports his poison’d shot, may miss our name,

									 									And hit the woundless air. O, come away!

									 									My soul is full of discord and dismay. Exeunt.





					Scene 					II


				Another room in the castle.

				 					 						 							 							 								Enter Hamlet.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Safely stowed.

						 							 Rosencrantz

							Guildenstern 							 Within. Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!

						 							 Hamlet 							 But soft, what noise? who calls on Hamlet? O, here they come.

						 							 							 								Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?

						 							 Hamlet 							 Compounded it with dust, whereto ’tis kin.

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 								 									Tell us where ’tis, that we may take it thence

									 									And bear it to the chapel.





						 							 Hamlet 							 Do not believe it.

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 Believe what?

						 							 Hamlet 							 That I can keep your counsel and not mine own. Besides, to be demanded of a sponge! what replication should be made by the son of a king?

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 Take you me for a sponge, my lord?

						 							 Hamlet 							 Ay, sir, that soaks up the king’s countenance, his rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the king best service in the end: he keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw; first mouthed, to be last swallowed: when he needs what you have gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you shall be dry again.

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 I understand you not, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 I am glad of it: a knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear.

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 My lord, you must tell us where the body is, and go with us to the king.

						 							 Hamlet 							 The body is with the king, but the king is not with the body. The king is a thing—

						 							 Guildenstern 							 A thing, my lord!

						 							 Hamlet 							 Of nothing: bring me to him. Hide fox, and all after. Exeunt.