					Scene 					III


				Another room in the castle.

				 					 						 							 							 								Enter King, attended.

						 							 King 							 								 									I have sent to seek him, and to find the body.

									 									How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!

									 									Yet must not we put the strong law on him:

									 									He’s loved of the distracted multitude,

									 									Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes:

									 									And where ’tis so, the offender’s scourge is weigh’d,

									 									But never the offence. To bear all smooth and even,

									 									This sudden sending him away must seem

									 									Deliberate pause: diseases desperate grown

									 									By desperate appliance are relieved,

									 									Or not at all.





						 							 							 								Enter Rosencrantz.

						 							 							 How now! what hath befall’n?

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 								 									Where the dead body is bestow’d, my lord,

									 									We cannot get from him.





						 							 King 							 But where is he?

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.

						 							 King 							 Bring him before us.

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 Ho, Guildenstern! bring in my lord.

						 							 							 								Enter Hamlet and Guildenstern.

						 							 King 							 Now, Hamlet, where’s Polonius?

						 							 Hamlet 							 At supper.

						 							 King 							 At supper! where?

						 							 Hamlet 							 Not where he eats, but where he is eaten: a certain convocation of politic worms are e’en at him. Your worm is your only emperor for diet: we fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves for maggots: your fat king and your lean beggar is but variable service, two dishes, but to one table: that’s the end.

						 							 King 							 Alas, alas!

						 							 Hamlet 							 A man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a king, and eat of the fish that hath fed of that worm.

						 							 King 							 What dost you mean by this?

						 							 Hamlet 							 Nothing but to show you how a king may go a progress through the guts of a beggar.

						 							 King 							 Where is Polonius?

						 							 Hamlet 							 In heaven; send hither to see: if your messenger find him not there, seek him i’ the other place yourself. But indeed, if you find him not within this month, you shall nose him as you go up the stairs into the lobby.

						 							 King 							 Go seek him there. To some Attendants.

						 							 Hamlet 							 He will stay till ye come. Exeunt Attendants.

						 							 King 							 								 									Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety—

									 									Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve

									 									For that which thou hast done—must send thee hence

									 									With fiery quickness: therefore prepare thyself;

									 									The bark is ready, and the wind at help,

									 									The associates tend, and every thing is bent

									 									For England.





						 							 Hamlet 							 For England!

						 							 King 							 Ay, Hamlet.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Good.

						 							 King 							 So is it, if thou knew’st our purposes.

						 							 Hamlet 							 I see a cherub that sees them. But, come; for England! Farewell, dear mother.

						 							 King 							 Thy loving father, Hamlet.

						 							 Hamlet 							 My mother: father and mother is man and wife; man and wife is one flesh; and so, my mother. Come, for England! Exit.

						 							 King 							 								 									Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard;

									 									Delay it not; I’ll have him hence to-night:

									 									Away! for every thing is seal’d and done

									 									That else leans on the affair: pray you, make haste. Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

									 									And, England, if my love thou hold’st at aught—

									 									As my great power thereof may give thee sense,

									 									Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red

									 									After the Danish sword, and thy free awe

									 									Pays homage to us—thou mayst not coldly set

									 									Our sovereign process; which imports at full,

									 									By letters congruing to that effect,

									 									The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England;

									 									For like the hectic in my blood he rages,

									 									And thou must cure me: till I know ’tis done,

									 									Howe’er my haps, my joys were ne’er begun. Exit.





					Scene 					IV


				A plain in Denmark.

				 					 						 							 							 								Enter Fortinbras, a Captain, and Soldiers, marching.

						 							 Prince Fortinbras 							 								 									Go, captain, from me greet the Danish king;

									 									Tell him that, by his license, Fortinbras

									 									Craves the conveyance of a promised march

									 									Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.

									 									If that his majesty would aught with us,

									 									We shall express our duty in his eye;

									 									And let him know so.





						 							 Captain 							 I will do’t, my lord.

						 							 Prince Fortinbras 							 Go softly on. Exeunt Fortinbras and Soldiers.

						 							 							 								Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Good sir, whose powers are these?

						 							 Captain 							 They are of Norway, sir.

						 							 Hamlet 							 How purposed, sir, I pray you?

						 							 Captain 							 Against some part of Poland.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Who commands them, sir?

						 							 Captain 							 The nephews to old Norway, Fortinbras.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,

									 									Or for some frontier?





						 							 Captain 							 								 									Truly to speak, and with no addition,

									 									We go to gain a little patch of ground

									 									That hath in it no profit but the name.

									 									To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;

									 									Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole

									 									A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.





						 							 Hamlet 							 Why, then the Polack never will defend it.

						 							 Captain 							 Yes, it is already garrison’d.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats

									 									Will not debate the question of this straw:

									 									This is the imposthume of much wealth and peace,

									 									That inward breaks, and shows no cause without

									 									Why the man dies. I humbly thank you, sir.





						 							 Captain 							 God be wi’ you, sir. Exit.

						 							 Rosencrantz 							 Will’t please you go, my lord?

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									I’ll be with you straight. Go a little before. Exeunt all except Hamlet.

									 									How all occasions do inform against me,

									 									And spur my dull revenge! What is a man,

									 									If his chief good and market of his time

									 									Be but to sleep and feed? a beast, no more.

									 									Sure, he that made us with such large discourse,

									 									Looking before and after, gave us not

									 									That capability and god-like reason

									 									To fust in us unused. Now, whether it be

									 									Bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple

									 									Of thinking too precisely on the event,

									 									A thought which, quarter’d, hath but one part wisdom

									 									And ever three parts coward, I do not know

									 									Why yet I live to say “This thing’s to do;”

									 									Sith I have cause and will and strength and means

									 									To do’t. Examples gross as earth exhort me:

									 									Witness this army of such mass and charge

									 									Led by a delicate and tender prince,

									 									Whose spirit with divine ambition puff’d

									 									Makes mouths at the invisible event,

									 									Exposing what is mortal and unsure

									 									To all that fortune, death and danger dare,

									 									Even for an egg-shell. Rightly to be great

									 									Is not to stir without great argument,

									 									But greatly to find quarrel in a straw

									 									When honour’s at the stake. How stand I then,

									 									That have a father kill’d, a mother stain’d,

									 									Excitements of my reason and my blood

									 									And let all sleep? while, to my shame, I see

									 									The imminent death of twenty thousand men,

									 									That, for a fantasy and trick of fame,

									 									Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot

									 									Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,

									 									Which is not tomb enough and continent

									 									To hide the slain? O, from this time forth,

									 									My thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth! Exit.





					Scene 					V


				Elsinore. A room in the castle.

				 					 						 							 							 								Enter Queen, Horatio, and a Gentleman.

						 							 Queen 							 I will not speak with her.

						 							 Gentleman 							 								 									She is importunate, indeed distract:

									 									Her mood will needs be pitied.





						 							 Queen 							 What would she have?

						 							 Gentleman 							 								 									She speaks much of her father; says she hears

									 									There’s tricks i’ the world; and hems, and beats her heart;

									 									Spurns enviously at straws; speaks things in doubt,

									 									That carry but half sense: her speech is nothing,

									 									Yet the unshaped use of it doth move

									 									The hearers to collection; they aim at it,

									 									And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;

									 									Which, as her winks, and nods, and gestures yield them,

									 									Indeed would make one think there might be thought,

									 									Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.





						 							 Horatio 							 								 									’Twere good she were spoken with; for she may strew

									 									Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.





						 							 Queen 							 								 									Let her come in. Exit Horatio.

									 									To my sick soul, as sin’s true nature is,

									 									Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss:

									 									So full of artless jealousy is guilt,

									 									It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.





						 							 							 								Reenter Horatio, with Ophelia.

						 							 Ophelia 							 Where is the beauteous majesty of Denmark?

						 							 Queen 							 How now, Ophelia!

						 							 Ophelia 							 								 									Sings.

								 									 										How should I your true love know

										 										From another one?

										 										By his cockle hat and staff,

										 										And his sandal shoon.





						 							 Queen 							 Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?

						 							 Ophelia 							 								Say you? nay, pray you, mark. Sings.

								 									 										He is dead and gone, lady,

										 										He is dead and gone;

										 										At his head a grass-green turf,

										 										At his heels a stone.





						 							 Queen 							 Nay, but, Ophelia—

						 							 Ophelia 							 								Pray you, mark. Sings.

								 									 										White his shroud as the mountain snow—





						 							 							 								Enter King.

						 							 Queen 							 Alas, look here, my lord.

						 							 Ophelia 							 								 									Sings.

								 									 										Larded with sweet flowers;

										 										Which bewept to the grave did go

										 										With true-love showers.





						 							 King 							 How do you, pretty lady?

						 							 Ophelia 							 Well, God ’ild you! They say the owl was a baker’s daughter. Lord, we know what we are, but know not what we may be. God be at your table!

						 							 King 							 Conceit upon her father.

						 							 Ophelia 							 								Pray you, let’s have no words of this; but when they ask you what it means, say you this: Sings.

								 									 										To-morrow is Saint Valentine’s day,

										 										All in the morning betime,

										 										And I a maid at your window,

										 										To be your Valentine.

										 										Then up he rose, and donn’d his clothes,

										 										And dupp’d the chamber-door;

										 										Let in the maid, that out a maid

										 										Never departed more.





						 							 King 							 Pretty Ophelia!

						 							 Ophelia 							 								Indeed, la, without an oath, I’ll make an end on’t: Sings.

								 									 										By Gis and by Saint Charity,

										 										Alack, and fie for shame!

										 										Young men will do’t, if they come to’t;

										 										By cock, they are to blame.

										 										Quoth she, before you tumbled me,

										 										You promised me to wed.

										 										So would I ha’ done, by yonder sun,

										 										An thou hadst not come to my bed.





						 							 King 							 How long hath she been thus?

						 							 Ophelia 							 I hope all will be well. We must be patient: but I cannot choose but weep, to think they should lay him i’ the cold ground. My brother shall know of it: and so I thank you for your good counsel. Come, my coach! Good night, ladies; good night, sweet ladies; good night, good night. Exit.

						 							 King 							 								 									Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you. Exit Horatio.

									 									O, this is the poison of deep grief; it springs

									 									All from her father’s death. O Gertrude, Gertrude,

									 									When sorrows come, they come not single spies,

									 									But in battalions. First, her father slain:

									 									Next, your son gone; and he most violent author

									 									Of his own just remove: the people muddied,

									 									Thick and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers,

									 									For good Polonius’ death; and we have done but greenly,

									 									In hugger-mugger to inter him: poor Ophelia

									 									Divided from herself and her fair judgment,

									 									Without the which we are pictures, or mere beasts:

									 									Last, and as much containing as all these,

									 									Her brother is in secret come from France;

									 									Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,

									 									And wants not buzzers to infect his ear

									 									With pestilent speeches of his father’s death;

									 									Wherein necessity, of matter beggar’d,

									 									Will nothing stick our person to arraign

									 									In ear and ear. O my dear Gertrude, this,

									 									Like to a murdering-piece, in many places

									 									Gives me superfluous death. A noise within.





						 							 Queen 							 Alack, what noise is this?

						 							 King 							 Where are my Switzers? Let them guard the door.

						 							 							 								Enter another Gentleman.

						 							 							 What is the matter?

						 							 Gentleman 							 								 									Save yourself, my lord:

									 									The ocean, overpeering of his list,

									 									Eats not the flats with more impetuous haste

									 									Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,

									 									O’erbears your officers. The rabble call him lord;

									 									And, as the world were now but to begin,

									 									Antiquity forgot, custom not known,

									 									The ratifiers and props of every word,

									 									They cry “Choose we: Laertes shall be king:”

									 									Caps, hands, and tongues, applaud it to the clouds:

									 									“Laertes shall be king, Laertes king!”





						 							 Queen 							 								 									How cheerfully on the false trail they cry!

									 									O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!





						 							 King 							 The doors are broke. Noise within.

						 							 							 								Enter Laertes, armed; Danes following.

						 							 Laertes 							 Where is this king? Sirs, stand you all without.

						 							 Danes 							 No, let’s come in.

						 							 Laertes 							 I pray you, give me leave.

						 							 Danes 							 We will, we will. They retire without the door.

						 							 Laertes 							 								 									I thank you: keep the door. O thou vile king,

									 									Give me my father!





						 							 Queen 							 Calmly, good Laertes.

						 							 Laertes 							 								 									That drop of blood that’s calm proclaims me bastard,

									 									Cries cuckold to my father, brands the harlot

									 									Even here, between the chaste unsmirched brow

									 									Of my true mother.





						 							 King 							 								 									What is the cause, Laertes,

									 									That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?

									 									Let him go, Gertrude; do not fear our person:

									 									There’s such divinity doth hedge a king,

									 									That treason can but peep to what it would,

									 									Acts little of his will. Tell me, Laertes,

									 									Why thou art thus incensed. Let him go, Gertrude.

									 									Speak, man.





						 							 Laertes 							 Where is my father?

						 							 King 							 Dead.

						 							 Queen 							 But not by him.

						 							 King 							 Let him demand his fill.

						 							 Laertes 							 								 									How came he dead? I’ll not be juggled with:

									 									To hell, allegiance! vows, to the blackest devil!

									 									Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!

									 									I dare damnation. To this point I stand,

									 									That both the worlds I give to negligence,

									 									Let come what comes; only I’ll be revenged

									 									Most thoroughly for my father.





						 							 King 							 Who shall stay you?

						 							 Laertes 							 								 									My will, not all the world:

									 									And for my means, I’ll husband them so well,

									 									They shall go far with little.





						 							 King 							 								 									Good Laertes,

									 									If you desire to know the certainty

									 									Of your dear father’s death, is’t writ in your revenge,

									 									That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and foe,

									 									Winner and loser?





						 							 Laertes 							 None but his enemies.

						 							 King 							 Will you know them then?

						 							 Laertes 							 								 									To his good friends thus wide I’ll ope my arms;

									 									And like the kind life-rendering pelican,

									 									Repast them with my blood.





						 							 King 							 								 									Why, now you speak

									 									Like a good child and a true gentleman.

									 									That I am guiltless of your father’s death,

									 									And am most sensible in grief for it,

									 									It shall as level to your judgment pierce

									 									As day does to your eye.





						 							 Danes 							 Within. Let her come in.

						 							 Laertes 							 How now! what noise is that?

						 							 							 								Reenter Ophelia.

						 							 							 								 									O heat, dry up my brains! tears seven times salt,

									 									Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!

									 									By heaven, thy madness shall be paid by weight,

									 									Till our scale turn the beam. O rose of May!

									 									Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!

									 									O heavens! is’t possible, a young maid’s wits

									 									Should be as moral as an old man’s life?

									 									Nature is fine in love, and where ’tis fine,

									 									It sends some precious instance of itself

									 									After the thing it loves.





						 							 Ophelia 							 								 									Sings.

								 									 										They bore him barefaced on the bier;

										 										Hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny;

										 										And in his grave rain’d many a tear:—





								Fare you well, my dove!



						 							 Laertes 							 								 									Hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge,

									 									It could not move thus.





						 							 Ophelia 							 								 									Sings.

								 									 										You must sing a-down a-down,

										 										An you call him a-down-a.





								O, how the wheel becomes it! It is the false steward, that stole his master’s daughter.



						 							 Laertes 							 This nothing’s more than matter.

						 							 Ophelia 							 There’s rosemary, that’s for remembrance; pray, love, remember: and there is pansies, that’s for thoughts.

						 							 Laertes 							 A document in madness, thoughts and remembrance fitted.

						 							 Ophelia 							 								There’s fennel for you, and columbines: there’s rue for you; and here’s some for me: we may call it herb-grace o’ Sundays: O you must wear your rue with a difference. There’s a daisy: I would give you some violets, but they withered all when my father died: they say he made a good end—Sings.

								 									 										For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.





						 							 Laertes 							 								 									Thought and affliction, passion, hell itself,

									 									She turns to favour and to prettiness.





						 							 Ophelia 							 								 									Sings.

								 									 										And will he not come again?

										 										And will he not come again?

										 										No, no, he is dead:

										 										Go to thy death-bed:

										 										He never will come again.



									 										His beard was as white as snow,

										 										All flaxen was his poll:

										 										He is gone, he is gone,

										 										And we cast away moan:

										 										God ha’ mercy on his soul!





								And of all Christian souls, I pray God. God be wi’ ye. Exit.



						 							 Laertes 							 Do you see this, O God?

						 							 King 							 								 									Laertes, I must commune with your grief,

									 									Or you deny me right. Go but apart,

									 									Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,

									 									And they shall hear and judge ’twixt you and me:

									 									If by direct or by collateral hand

									 									They find us touch’d, we will our kingdom give,

									 									Our crown, our life, and all that we can ours,

									 									To you in satisfaction; but if not,

									 									Be you content to lend your patience to us,

									 									And we shall jointly labour with your soul

									 									To give it due content.





						 							 Laertes 							 								 									Let this be so;

									 									His means of death, his obscure funeral—

									 									No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o’er his bones,

									 									No noble rite nor formal ostentation—

									 									Cry to be heard, as ’twere from heaven to earth,

									 									That I must call’t in question.





						 							 King 							 								 									So you shall;

									 									And where the offence is let the great axe fall.

									 									I pray you, go with me. Exeunt.





					Scene 					VI


				Another room in the castle.

				 					 						 							 							 								Enter Horatio and a Servant.

						 							 Horatio 							 What are they that would speak with me?

						 							 Servant 							 Sailors, sir: they say they have letters for you.

						 							 Horatio 							 Let them come in. Exit Servant. I do not know from what part of the world I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.

						 							 							 								Enter Sailors.

						 							 First Sailor 							 God bless you, sir.

						 							 Horatio 							 Let him bless thee too.

						 							 First Sailor 							 He shall, sir, an’t please him. There’s a letter for you, sir; it comes from the ambassador that was bound for England; if your name be Horatio, as I am let to know it is.

						 							 Horatio 							 								 									Reads.

								 									“Horatio, when thou shalt have overlooked this, give these fellows some means to the king: they have letters for him. Ere we were two days old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave us chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on a compelled valour, and in the grapple I boarded them: on the instant they got clear of our ship; so I alone became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like thieves of mercy: but they knew what they did; I am to do a good turn for them. Let the king have the letters I have sent; and repair thou to me with as much speed as thou wouldst fly death. I have words to speak in thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows will bring thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern hold their course for England: of them I have much to tell thee. Farewell.

									 										“He that thou knowest thine, Hamlet.”





								 									 										Come, I will make you way for these your letters;

										 										And do’t the speedier, that you may direct me

										 										To him from whom you brought them. Exeunt.