					Scene 					VII


				Another room in the castle.

				 					 						 							 							 								Enter King and Laertes.

						 							 King 							 								 									Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,

									 									And you must put me in your heart for friend,

									 									Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,

									 									That he which hath your noble father slain

									 									Pursued my life.





						 							 Laertes 							 								 									It well appears: but tell me

									 									Why you proceeded not against these feats,

									 									So crimeful and so capital in nature,

									 									As by your safety, wisdom, all things else,

									 									You mainly were stirr’d up.





						 							 King 							 								 									O, for two special reasons;

									 									Which may to you, perhaps, seem much unsinew’d,

									 									But yet to me they are strong. The queen his mother

									 									Lives almost by his looks; and for myself—

									 									My virtue or my plague, be it either which—

									 									She’s so conjunctive to my life and soul,

									 									That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,

									 									I could not but by her. The other motive,

									 									Why to a public count I might not go,

									 									Is the great love the general gender bear him;

									 									Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,

									 									Would, like the spring that turneth wood to stone,

									 									Convert his gyves to graces; so that my arrows,

									 									Too slightly timber’d for so loud a wind,

									 									Would have reverted to my bow again,

									 									And not where I had aim’d them.





						 							 Laertes 							 								 									And so have I a noble father lost;

									 									A sister driven into desperate terms,

									 									Whose worth, if praises may go back again,

									 									Stood challenger on mount of all the age

									 									For her perfections: but my revenge will come.





						 							 King 							 								 									Break not your sleeps for that: you must not think

									 									That we are made of stuff so flat and dull

									 									That we can let our beard be shook with danger

									 									And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more:

									 									I loved your father, and we love ourself;

									 									And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine—





						 							 							 								Enter a Messenger.

						 							 							 How now! what news?

						 							 Messenger 							 								 									Letters, my lord, from Hamlet:

									 									This to your majesty; this to the queen.





						 							 King 							 From Hamlet! who brought them?

						 							 Messenger 							 								 									Sailors, my lord, they say; I saw them not:

									 									They were given me by Claudio; he received them

									 									Of him that brought them.





						 							 King 							 								Laertes, you shall hear them. Leave us. Exit Messenger.

								 									Reads.

								 									“High and mighty, You shall know I am set naked on your kingdom. To-morrow shall I beg leave to see your kingly eyes: when I shall, first asking your pardon thereunto, recount the occasion of my sudden and more strange return.

									 										Hamlet.”





								 									 										What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?

										 										Or is it some abuse, and no such thing?





						 							 Laertes 							 Know you the hand?

						 							 King 							 								 									’Tis Hamlet’s character. “Naked!”

									 									And in a postscript here, he says “alone.”

									 									Can you advise me?





						 							 Laertes 							 								 									I’m lost in it, my lord. But let him come;

									 									It warms the very sickness in my heart,

									 									That I shall live and tell him to his teeth,

									 									“Thus didest thou.”





						 							 King 							 								 									If it be so, Laertes—

									 									As how should it be so? how otherwise?—

									 									Will you be ruled by me?





						 							 Laertes 							 								 									Ay, my lord;

									 									So you will not o’errule me to a peace.





						 							 King 							 								 									To thine own peace. If he be now return’d,

									 									As checking at his voyage, and that he means

									 									No more to undertake it, I will work him

									 									To an exploit, now ripe in my device,

									 									Under the which he shall not choose but fall:

									 									And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,

									 									But even his mother shall uncharge the practice

									 									And call it accident.





						 							 Laertes 							 								 									My lord, I will be ruled;

									 									The rather, if you could devise it so

									 									That I might be the organ.





						 							 King 							 								 									It falls right.

									 									You have been talk’d of since your travel much,

									 									And that in Hamlet’s hearing, for a quality

									 									Wherein, they say, you shine: your sum of parts

									 									Did not together pluck such envy from him

									 									As did that one, and that, in my regard,

									 									Of the unworthiest siege.





						 							 Laertes 							 What part is that, my lord?

						 							 King 							 								 									A very riband in the cap of youth,

									 									Yet needful too; for youth no less becomes

									 									The light and careless livery that it wears

									 									Than settled age his sables and his weeds,

									 									Importing health and graveness. Two months since,

									 									Here was a gentleman of Normandy:—

									 									I’ve seen myself, and served against, the French,

									 									And they can well on horseback: but this gallant

									 									Had witchcraft in’t; he grew unto his seat;

									 									And to such wondrous doing brought his horse,

									 									As he had been incorpsed and demi-natured

									 									With the brave beast: so far he topp’d my thought,

									 									That I, in forgery of shapes and tricks,

									 									Come short of what he did.





						 							 Laertes 							 A Norman was’t?

						 							 King 							 A Norman.

						 							 Laertes 							 Upon my life, Lamond.

						 							 King 							 The very same.

						 							 Laertes 							 								 									I know him well: he is the brooch indeed

									 									And gem of all the nation.





						 							 King 							 								 									He made confession of you,

									 									And gave you such a masterly report

									 									For art and exercise in your defence

									 									And for your rapier most especial,

									 									That he cried out, ’twould be a sight indeed,

									 									If one could match you: the scrimers of their nation,

									 									He swore, had had neither motion, guard, nor eye,

									 									If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his

									 									Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy

									 									That he could nothing do but wish and beg

									 									Your sudden coming o’er, to play with him.

									 									Now, out of this—





						 							 Laertes 							 What out of this, my lord?

						 							 King 							 								 									Laertes, was your father dear to you?

									 									Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,

									 									A face without a heart?





						 							 Laertes 							 Why ask you this?

						 							 King 							 								 									Not that I think you did not love your father;

									 									But that I know love is begun by time;

									 									And that I see, in passages of proof,

									 									Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.

									 									There lives within the very flame of love

									 									A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it;

									 									And nothing is at a like goodness still;

									 									For goodness, growing to a plurisy,

									 									Dies in his own too much: that we would do,

									 									We should do when we would; for this “would” changes

									 									And hath abatements and delays as many

									 									As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;

									 									And then this “should” is like a spendthrift sigh,

									 									That hurts by easing. But, to the quick o’ the ulcer:—

									 									Hamlet comes back: what would you undertake,

									 									To show yourself your father’s son in deed

									 									More than in words?





						 							 Laertes 							 To cut his throat i’ the church.

						 							 King 							 								 									No place, indeed, should murder sanctuarize;

									 									Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,

									 									Will you do this, keep close within your chamber.

									 									Hamlet return’d shall know you are come home:

									 									We’ll put on those shall praise your excellence

									 									And set a double varnish on the fame

									 									The Frenchman gave you, bring you in fine together

									 									And wager on your heads: he, being remiss,

									 									Most generous and free from all contriving,

									 									Will not peruse the foils; so that, with ease,

									 									Or with a little shuffling, you may choose

									 									A sword unbated, and in a pass of practice

									 									Requite him for your father.





						 							 Laertes 							 								 									I will do’t:

									 									And, for that purpose, I’ll anoint my sword.

									 									I bought an unction of a mountebank,

									 									So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,

									 									Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,

									 									Collected from all simples that have virtue

									 									Under the moon, can save the thing from death

									 									That is but scratch’d withal: I’ll touch my point

									 									With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,

									 									It may be death.





						 							 King 							 								 									Let’s further think of this;

									 									Weigh what convenience both of time and means

									 									May fit us to our shape: if this should fail,

									 									And that our drift look through our bad performance,

									 									’Twere better not assay’d: therefore this project

									 									Should have a back or second, that might hold,

									 									If this should blast in proof. Soft! let me see:

									 									We’ll make a solemn wager on your cunnings:

									 									I ha’t.

									 									When in your motion you are hot and dry—

									 									As make your bouts more violent to that end—

									 									And that he calls for drink, I’ll have prepared him

									 									A chalice for the nonce, whereon but sipping,

									 									If he by chance escape your venom’d stuck,

									 									Our purpose may hold there.





						 							 							 								Enter Queen.

						 							 							 How now, sweet queen!

						 							 Queen 							 								 									One woe doth tread upon another’s heel,

									 									So fast they follow: your sister’s drown’d, Laertes.





						 							 Laertes 							 Drown’d! O, where?

						 							 Queen 							 								 									There is a willow grows aslant a brook,

									 									That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream;

									 									There with fantastic garlands did she come

									 									Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples

									 									That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,

									 									But our cold maids do dead men’s fingers call them:

									 									There, on the pendent boughs her coronet weeds

									 									Clambering to hang, an envious sliver broke;

									 									When down her weedy trophies and herself

									 									Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide;

									 									And, mermaid-like, awhile they bore her up:

									 									Which time she chanted snatches of old tunes;

									 									As one incapable of her own distress,

									 									Or like a creature native and indued

									 									Unto that element: but long it could not be

									 									Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,

									 									Pull’d the poor wretch from her melodious lay

									 									To muddy death.





						 							 Laertes 							 Alas, then, she is drown’d?

						 							 Queen 							 Drown’d, drown’d.

						 							 Laertes 							 								 									Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,

									 									And therefore I forbid my tears: but yet

									 									It is our trick; nature her custom holds,

									 									Let shame say what it will: when these are gone,

									 									The woman will be out. Adieu, my lord:

									 									I have a speech of fire, that fain would blaze,

									 									But that this folly douts it. Exit.





						 							 King 							 								 									Let’s follow, Gertrude:

									 									How much I had to do to calm his rage!

									 									Now fear I this will give it start again;

									 									Therefore let’s follow. Exeunt.





				Act 				V




					Scene 					I


				A churchyard.

				 					 						 							 							 								Enter two Clowns, with spades, etc.

						 							 First Clown 							 Is she to be buried in Christian burial that wilfully seeks her own salvation?

						 							 Second Clown 							 I tell thee she is: and therefore make her grave straight: the crowner hath sat on her, and finds it Christian burial.

						 							 First Clown 							 How can that be, unless she drowned herself in her own defence?

						 							 Second Clown 							 Why, ’tis found so.

						 							 First Clown 							 It must be “se offendendo;” it cannot be else. For here lies the point: if I drown myself wittingly, it argues an act: and an act hath three branches; it is, to act, to do, to perform: argal, she drowned herself wittingly.

						 							 Second Clown 							 Nay, but hear you, goodman delver—

						 							 First Clown 							 Give me leave. Here lies the water; good: here stands the man; good: if the man go to this water, and drown himself, it is, will he, nill he, he goes—mark you that; but if the water come to him and drown him, he drowns not himself: argal, he that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his own life.

						 							 Second Clown 							 But is this law?

						 							 First Clown 							 Ay, marry, is’t; crowner’s quest law.

						 							 Second Clown 							 Will you ha’ the truth on’t? If this had not been a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o’ Christian burial.

						 							 First Clown 							 Why, there thou say’st: and the more pity that great folk should have countenance in this world to drown or hang themselves, more than their even Christian. Come, my spade. There is no ancient gentleman but gardeners, ditchers, and grave-makers: they hold up Adam’s profession.

						 							 Second Clown 							 Was he a gentleman?

						 							 First Clown 							 A’ was the first that ever bore arms.

						 							 Second Clown 							 Why, he had none.

						 							 First Clown 							 What, art a heathen? How dost thou understand the Scripture? The Scripture says “Adam digged:” could he dig without arms? I’ll put another question to thee: if thou answerest me not to the purpose, confess thyself—

						 							 Second Clown 							 Go to.

						 							 First Clown 							 What is he that builds stronger than either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?

						 							 Second Clown 							 The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a thousand tenants.

						 							 First Clown 							 I like thy wit well, in good faith: the gallows does well; but how does it well? it does well to those that do ill: now thou dost ill to say the gallows is built stronger than the church: argal, the gallows may do well to thee. To’t again, come.

						 							 Second Clown 							 “Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or a carpenter?”

						 							 First Clown 							 Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.

						 							 Second Clown 							 Marry, now I can tell.

						 							 First Clown 							 To’t.

						 							 Second Clown 							 Mass, I cannot tell.

						 							 							 								Enter Hamlet and Horatio, at a distance.

						 							 First Clown 							 								Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull ass will not mend his pace with beating; and, when you are asked this question next, say “a grave-maker:” the houses that he makes last till doomsday. Go, get thee to Yaughan: fetch me a stoup of liquor. Exit Second Clown. He digs and sings.

								 									 										In youth, when I did love, did love,

										 										Methought it was very sweet,

										 										To contract, O, the time, for, ah, my behove,

										 										O, methought, there was nothing meet.





						 							 Hamlet 							 Has this fellow no feeling of his business, that he sings at grave-making?

						 							 Horatio 							 Custom hath made it in him a property of easiness.

						 							 Hamlet 							 ’Tis e’en so: the hand of little employment hath the daintier sense.

						 							 First Clown 							 								 									Sings.

								 									 										But age, with his stealing steps,

										 										Hath claw’d me in his clutch,

										 										And hath shipped me intil the land,

										 										As if I had never been such.





								 									Throws up a skull.



						 							 Hamlet 							 That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once: how the knave jowls it to the ground, as if it were Cain’s jaw-bone, that did the first murder! It might be the pate of a politician, which this ass now o’er-reaches; one that would circumvent God, might it not?

						 							 Horatio 							 It might, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Or of a courtier; which could say “Good morrow, sweet lord! How dost thou, good lord?” This might be my lord such-a-one, that praised my lord such-a-one’s horse, when he meant to beg it; might it not?

						 							 Horatio 							 Ay, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Why, e’en so: and now my Lady Worm’s; chapless, and knocked about the mazzard with a sexton’s spade: here’s fine revolution, an we had the trick to see’t. Did these bones cost no more the breeding, but to play at loggats with ’em? mine ache to think on’t.

						 							 First Clown 							 								 									Sings.

								 									 										A pick-axe, and a spade, a spade,

										 										For and a shrouding sheet:

										 										O, a pit of clay for to be made

										 										For such a guest is meet.





								 									Throws up another skull.



						 							 Hamlet 							 There’s another: why may not that be the skull of a lawyer? Where be his quiddities now, his quillets, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock him about the sconce with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him of his action of battery? Hum! This fellow might be in’s time a great buyer of land, with his statutes, his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers, his recoveries: is this the fine of his fines, and the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full of fine dirt? will his vouchers vouch him no more of his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very conveyances of his lands will hardly lie in this box; and must the inheritor himself have no more, ha?

						 							 Horatio 							 Not a jot more, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Is not parchment made of sheepskins?

						 							 Horatio 							 Ay, my lord, and of calf-skins too.

						 							 Hamlet 							 They are sheep and calves which seek out assurance in that. I will speak to this fellow. Whose grave’s this, sirrah?

						 							 First Clown 							 								Mine, sir. Sings.

								 									 										O, a pit of clay for to be made

										 										For such a guest is meet.





						 							 Hamlet 							 I think it be thine, indeed; for thou liest in’t.

						 							 First Clown 							 You lie out on’t, sir, and therefore it is not yours: for my part, I do not lie in’t, and yet it is mine.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Thou dost lie in’t, to be in’t and say it is thine: ’tis for the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou liest.

						 							 First Clown 							 ’Tis a quick lie, sir; ’twill away again, from me to you.

						 							 Hamlet 							 What man dost thou dig it for?

						 							 First Clown 							 For no man, sir.

						 							 Hamlet 							 What woman, then?

						 							 First Clown 							 For none, neither.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Who is to be buried in’t?

						 							 First Clown 							 One that was a woman, sir; but, rest her soul, she’s dead.

						 							 Hamlet 							 How absolute the knave is! we must speak by the card, or equivocation will undo us. By the Lord, Horatio, these three years I have taken a note of it; the age is grown so picked that the toe of the peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, he galls his kibe. How long hast thou been a grave-maker?

						 							 First Clown 							 Of all the days i’ the year, I came to’t that day that our last king Hamlet overcame Fortinbras.

						 							 Hamlet 							 How long is that since?

						 							 First Clown 							 Cannot you tell that? every fool can tell that: it was the very day that young Hamlet was born; he that is mad, and sent into England.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?

						 							 First Clown 							 Why, because he was mad: he shall recover his wits there; or, if he do not, it’s no great matter there.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Why?

						 							 First Clown 							 ’Twill not be seen in him there; there the men are as mad as he.

						 							 Hamlet 							 How came he mad?

						 							 First Clown 							 Very strangely, they say.

						 							 Hamlet 							 How strangely?

						 							 First Clown 							 Faith, e’en with losing his wits.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Upon what ground?

						 							 First Clown 							 Why, here in Denmark: I have been sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.

						 							 Hamlet 							 How long will a man lie i’ the earth ere he rot?

						 							 First Clown 							 I’ faith, if he be not rotten before he die—as we have many pocky corses now-a-days, that will scarce hold the laying in—he will last you some eight year or nine year: a tanner will last you nine year.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Why he more than another?

						 							 First Clown 							 Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his trade, that he will keep out water a great while; and your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead body. Here’s a skull now; this skull has lain in the earth three and twenty years.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Whose was it?

						 							 First Clown 							 A whoreson mad fellow’s it was: whose do you think it was?

						 							 Hamlet 							 Nay, I know not.

						 							 First Clown 							 A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! a’ poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once. This same skull, sir, was Yorick’s skull, the king’s jester.

						 							 Hamlet 							 This?

						 							 First Clown 							 E’en that.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Let me see. Takes the skull. Alas, poor Yorick! I knew him, Horatio: a fellow of infinite jest, of most excellent fancy: he hath borne me on his back a thousand times; and now, how abhorred in my imagination it is! my gorge rises at it. Here hung those lips that I have kissed I know not how oft. Where be your gibes now? your gambols? your songs? your flashes of merriment, that were wont to set the table on a roar? Not one now, to mock your own grinning? quite chap-fallen? Now get you to my lady’s chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch thick, to this favour she must come; make her laugh at that. Prithee, Horatio, tell me one thing.

						 							 Horatio 							 What’s that, my lord?

						 							 Hamlet 							 Dost thou think Alexander looked o’ this fashion i’ the earth?

						 							 Horatio 							 E’en so.

						 							 Hamlet 							 And smelt so? pah! Puts down the skull.

						 							 Horatio 							 E’en so, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 To what base uses we may return, Horatio! Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of Alexander, till he find it stopping a bung-hole?

						 							 Horatio 							 ’Twere to consider too curiously, to consider so.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither with modesty enough, and likelihood to lead it: as thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander returneth into dust; the dust is earth; of earth we make loam; and why of that loam, whereto he was converted, might they not stop a beer-barrel?

								 									 										Imperious Caesar, dead and turn’d to clay,

										 										Might stop a hole to keep the wind away:

										 										O, that that earth, which kept the world in awe,

										 										Should patch a wall to expel the winter flaw!

										 										But soft! but soft! aside: here comes the king,





						 							 							 								Enter Priests, etc. in procession; the Corpse of Ophelia, Laertes and Mourners following; King, Queen, their trains, etc.

						 							 							 								 									The queen, the courtiers: who is this they follow?

									 									And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken

									 									The corse they follow did with desperate hand

									 									Fordo its own life: ’twas of some estate.

									 									Couch we awhile, and mark. Retiring with Horatio.





						 							 Laertes 							 What ceremony else?

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									That is Laertes,

									 									A very noble youth: mark.





						 							 Laertes 							 What ceremony else?

						 							 First Priest 							 								 									Her obsequies have been as far enlarged

									 									As we have warranty: her death was doubtful;

									 									And, but that great command o’ersways the order,

									 									She should in ground unsanctified have lodged

									 									Till the last trumpet; for charitable prayers,

									 									Shards, flints and pebbles should be thrown on her:

									 									Yet here she is allow’d her virgin crants,

									 									Her maiden strewments and the bringing home

									 									Of bell and burial.





						 							 Laertes 							 Must there no more be done?

						 							 First Priest 							 								 									No more be done:

									 									We should profane the service of the dead

									 									To sing a requiem and such rest to her

									 									As to peace-parted souls.





						 							 Laertes 							 								 									Lay her i’ the earth:

									 									And from her fair and unpolluted flesh

									 									May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,

									 									A ministering angel shall my sister be,

									 									When thou liest howling.





						 							 Hamlet 							 What, the fair Ophelia!

						 							 Queen 							 								 									Sweets to the sweet: farewell! Scattering flowers.

									 									I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet’s wife;

									 									I thought thy bride-bed to have deck’d, sweet maid,

									 									And not have strew’d thy grave.





						 							 Laertes 							 								 									O, treble woe

									 									Fall ten times treble on that cursed head,

									 									Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense

									 									Deprived thee of! Hold off the earth awhile,

									 									Till I have caught her once more in mine arms: Leaps into the grave.

									 									Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,

									 									Till of this flat a mountain you have made,

									 									To o’ertop old Pelion, or the skyish head

									 									Of blue Olympus.





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Advancing. What is he whose grief

									 									Bears such an emphasis? whose phrase of sorrow

									 									Conjures the wandering stars, and makes them stand

									 									Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,

									 									Hamlet the Dane. Leaps into the grave.





						 							 Laertes 							 The devil take thy soul! Grappling with him.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Thou pray’st not well.

									 									I prithee, take thy fingers from my throat;

									 									For, though I am not splenitive and rash,

									 									Yet have I something in me dangerous,

									 									Which let thy wiseness fear: hold off thy hand.





						 							 King 							 Pluck them asunder.

						 							 Queen 							 Hamlet, Hamlet!

						 							 All 							 Gentlemen—

						 							 Horatio 							 Good my lord, be quiet. The Attendants part them, and they come out of the grave.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Why, I will fight with him upon this theme

									 									Until my eyelids will no longer wag.





						 							 Queen 							 O my son, what theme?

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									I loved Ophelia: forty thousand brothers

									 									Could not, with all their quantity of love,

									 									Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?





						 							 King 							 O, he is mad, Laertes.

						 							 Queen 							 For love of God, forbear him.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									’Swounds, show me what thou’lt do:

									 									Woo’t weep? woo’t fight? woo’t fast? woo’t tear thyself?

									 									Woo’t drink up eisel? eat a crocodile?

									 									I’ll do’t. Dost thou come here to whine?

									 									To outface me with leaping in her grave?

									 									Be buried quick with her, and so will I:

									 									And, if thou prate of mountains, let them throw

									 									Millions of acres on us, till our ground,

									 									Singeing his pate against the burning zone,

									 									Make Ossa like a wart! Nay, an thou’lt mouth,

									 									I’ll rant as well as thou.





						 							 Queen 							 								 									This is mere madness:

									 									And thus awhile the fit will work on him;

									 									Anon, as patient as the female dove,

									 									When that her golden couplets are disclosed,

									 									His silence will sit drooping.





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Hear you, sir;

									 									What is the reason that you use me thus?

									 									I loved you ever: but it is no matter;

									 									Let Hercules himself do what he may,

									 									The cat will mew and dog will have his day. Exit.





						 							 King 							 								 									I pray you, good Horatio, wait upon him. Exit Horatio.

									 									To Laertes. Strengthen your patience in our last night’s speech;

									 									We’ll put the matter to the present push.

									 									Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.

									 									This grave shall have a living monument:

									 									An hour of quiet shortly shall we see;

									 									Till then, in patience our proceeding be. Exeunt.