					Scene 					II


				A hall in the castle.

				 					 						 							 							 								Enter Hamlet and Horatio.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									So much for this, sir: now shall you see the other;

									 									You do remember all the circumstance?





						 							 Horatio 							 Remember it, my lord?

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting,

									 									That would not let me sleep: methought I lay

									 									Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly,

									 									And praised be rashness for it, let us know,

									 									Our indiscretion sometimes serves us well,

									 									When our deep plots do pall: and that should teach us

									 									There’s a divinity that shapes our ends,

									 									Rough-hew them how we will—





						 							 Horatio 							 That is most certain.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Up from my cabin,

									 									My sea-gown scarf’d about me, in the dark

									 									Groped I to find out them; had my desire,

									 									Finger’d their packet, and in fine withdrew

									 									To mine own room again; making so bold,

									 									My fears forgetting manners, to unseal

									 									Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio—

									 									O royal knavery!—an exact command,

									 									Larded with many several sorts of reasons

									 									Importing Denmark’s health and England’s too,

									 									With, ho! such bugs and goblins in my life,

									 									That, on the supervise, no leisure bated,

									 									No, not to stay the grinding of the axe,

									 									My head should be struck off.





						 							 Horatio 							 Is’t possible?

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Here’s the commission: read it at more leisure.

									 									But wilt thou hear me how I did proceed?





						 							 Horatio 							 I beseech you.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Being thus be-netted round with villainies—

									 									Ere I could make a prologue to my brains,

									 									They had begun the play—I sat me down,

									 									Devised a new commission, wrote it fair:

									 									I once did hold it, as our statists do,

									 									A baseness to write fair and labour’d much

									 									How to forget that learning, but, sir, now

									 									It did me yeoman’s service: wilt thou know

									 									The effect of what I wrote?





						 							 Horatio 							 Ay, good my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									An earnest conjuration from the king,

									 									As England was his faithful tributary,

									 									As love between them like the palm might flourish,

									 									As peace should still her wheaten garland wear

									 									And stand a comma ’tween their amities,

									 									And many such-like “As”es of great charge,

									 									That, on the view and knowing of these contents,

									 									Without debatement further, more or less,

									 									He should the bearers put to sudden death,

									 									Not shriving-time allow’d.





						 							 Horatio 							 How was this seal’d?

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.

									 									I had my father’s signet in my purse,

									 									Which was the model of that Danish seal;

									 									Folded the writ up in form of the other,

									 									Subscribed it, gave’t the impression, placed it safely,

									 									The changeling never known. Now, the next day

									 									Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent

									 									Thou know’st already.





						 							 Horatio 							 So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to’t.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Why, man, they did make love to this employment;

									 									They are not near my conscience; their defeat

									 									Does by their own insinuation grow:

									 									’Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes

									 									Between the pass and fell incensed points

									 									Of mighty opposites.





						 							 Horatio 							 Why, what a king is this!

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Does it not, think’st thee, stand me now upon—

									 									He that hath kill’d my king and whored my mother,

									 									Popp’d in between the election and my hopes,

									 									Thrown out his angle for my proper life,

									 									And with such cozenage—is’t not perfect conscience,

									 									To quit him with this arm? and is’t not to be damn’d,

									 									To let this canker of our nature come

									 									In further evil?





						 							 Horatio 							 								 									It must be shortly known to him from England

									 									What is the issue of the business there.





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									It will be short: the interim is mine;

									 									And a man’s life’s no more than to say “One.”

									 									But I am very sorry, good Horatio,

									 									That to Laertes I forgot myself;

									 									For, by the image of my cause, I see

									 									The portraiture of his: I’ll court his favours:

									 									But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me

									 									Into a towering passion.





						 							 Horatio 							 Peace! who comes here?

						 							 							 								Enter Osric.

						 							 Osric 							 Your lordship is right welcome back to Denmark.

						 							 Hamlet 							 I humbly thank you, sir. Dost know this water-fly?

						 							 Horatio 							 No, my good lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Thy state is the more gracious; for ’tis a vice to know him. He hath much land, and fertile: let a beast be lord of beasts, and his crib shall stand at the king’s mess: ’tis a chough; but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.

						 							 Osric 							 Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, I should impart a thing to you from his majesty.

						 							 Hamlet 							 I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use; ’tis for the head.

						 							 Osric 							 I thank your lordship, it is very hot.

						 							 Hamlet 							 No, believe me, ’tis very cold; the wind is northerly.

						 							 Osric 							 It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.

						 							 Hamlet 							 But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for my complexion.

						 							 Osric 							 Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry—as ’twere—I cannot tell how. But, my lord, his majesty bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager on your head: sir, this is the matter—

						 							 Hamlet 							 I beseech you, remember—Hamlet moves him to put on his hat.

						 							 Osric 							 Nay, good my lord; for mine ease, in good faith. Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes; believe me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent differences, of very soft society and great showing: indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the continent of what part a gentleman would see.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you; though, I know, to divide him inventorially would dizzy the arithmetic of memory, and yet but yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great article; and his infusion of such dearth and rareness, as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his mirror; and who else would trace him, his umbrage, nothing more.

						 							 Osric 							 Your lordship speaks most infallibly of him.

						 							 Hamlet 							 The concernancy, sir? why do we wrap the gentleman in our more rawer breath?

						 							 Osric 							 Sir?

						 							 Horatio 							 Is’t not possible to understand in another tongue? You will do’t, sir, really.

						 							 Hamlet 							 What imports the nomination of this gentleman?

						 							 Osric 							 Of Laertes?

						 							 Horatio 							 His purse is empty already; all’s golden words are spent.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Of him, sir.

						 							 Osric 							 I know you are not ignorant—

						 							 Hamlet 							 I would you did, sir; yet, in faith, if you did, it would not much approve me. Well, sir?

						 							 Osric 							 You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is—

						 							 Hamlet 							 I dare not confess that, lest I should compare with him in excellence; but, to know a man well, were to know himself.

						 							 Osric 							 I mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation laid on him by them, in his meed he’s unfellowed.

						 							 Hamlet 							 What’s his weapon?

						 							 Osric 							 Rapier and dagger.

						 							 Hamlet 							 That’s two of his weapons: but, well.

						 							 Osric 							 The king, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary horses: against the which he has imponed, as I take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so: three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of very liberal conceit.

						 							 Hamlet 							 What call you the carriages?

						 							 Horatio 							 I knew you must be edified by the margent ere you had done.

						 							 Osric 							 The carriages, sir, are the hangers.

						 							 Hamlet 							 The phrase would be more german to the matter, if we could carry cannon by our sides: I would it might be hangers till then. But, on: six Barbary horses against six French swords, their assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages; that’s the French bet against the Danish. Why is this “imponed,” as you call it?

						 							 Osric 							 The king, sir, hath laid, that in a dozen passes between yourself and him, he shall not exceed you three hits: he hath laid on twelve for nine; and it would come to immediate trial, if your lordship would vouchsafe the answer.

						 							 Hamlet 							 How if I answer “no”?

						 							 Osric 							 I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Sir, I will walk here in the hall: if it please his majesty, ’tis the breathing time of day with me; let the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the king hold his purpose, I will win for him an I can; if not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd hits.

						 							 Osric 							 Shall I re-deliver you e’en so?

						 							 Hamlet 							 To this effect, sir; after what flourish your nature will.

						 							 Osric 							 I commend my duty to your lordship.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Yours, yours. Exit Osric. He does well to commend it himself; there are no tongues else for’s turn.

						 							 Horatio 							 This lapwing runs away with the shell on his head.

						 							 Hamlet 							 He did comply with his dug, before he sucked it. Thus has he—and many more of the same bevy that I know the drossy age dotes on—only got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter; a kind of yesty collection, which carries them through and through the most fond and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to their trial, the bubbles are out.

						 							 							 								Enter a Lord.

						 							 Lord 							 My lord, his majesty commended him to you by young Osric, who brings back to him that you attend him in the hall: he sends to know if your pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will take longer time.

						 							 Hamlet 							 I am constant to my purpose; they follow the king’s pleasure: if his fitness speaks, mine is ready; now or whensoever, provided I be so able as now.

						 							 Lord 							 The king and queen and all are coming down.

						 							 Hamlet 							 In happy time.

						 							 Lord 							 The queen desires you to use some gentle entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play.

						 							 Hamlet 							 She well instructs me. Exit Lord.

						 							 Horatio 							 You will lose this wager, my lord.

						 							 Hamlet 							 I do not think so: since he went into France, I have been in continual practice: I shall win at the odds. But thou wouldst not think how ill all’s here about my heart: but it is no matter.

						 							 Horatio 							 Nay, good my lord—

						 							 Hamlet 							 It is but foolery; but it is such a kind of gain-giving, as would perhaps trouble a woman.

						 							 Horatio 							 If your mind dislike any thing, obey it: I will forestall their repair hither, and say you are not fit.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Not a whit, we defy augury: there’s a special providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, ’tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be now; if it be not now, yet it will come: the readiness is all: since no man has aught of what he leaves, what is’t to leave betimes?

						 							 							 								Enter King, Queen, Laertes, Lords, Osric, and Attendants with foils, etc.

						 							 King 							 Come, Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me.

						 							 							 								The King puts Laertes’ hand into Hamlet’s.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Give me your pardon, sir: I’ve done you wrong;

									 									But pardon’t, as you are a gentleman.

									 									This presence knows,

									 									And you must needs have heard, how I am punish’d

									 									With sore distraction. What I have done,

									 									That might your nature, honour and exception

									 									Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.

									 									Was’t Hamlet wrong’d Laertes? Never Hamlet:

									 									If Hamlet from himself be ta’en away,

									 									And when he’s not himself does wrong Laertes,

									 									Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it.

									 									Who does it, then? His madness: if’t be so,

									 									Hamlet is of the faction that is wrong’d;

									 									His madness is poor Hamlet’s enemy.

									 									Sir, in this audience,

									 									Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil

									 									Free me so far in your most generous thoughts,

									 									That I have shot mine arrow o’er the house,

									 									And hurt my brother.





						 							 Laertes 							 								 									I am satisfied in nature,

									 									Whose motive, in this case, should stir me most

									 									To my revenge: but in my terms of honour

									 									I stand aloof; and will no reconcilement,

									 									Till by some elder masters, of known honour,

									 									I have a voice and precedent of peace,

									 									To keep my name ungored. But till that time,

									 									I do receive your offer’d love like love,

									 									And will not wrong it.





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									I embrace it freely;

									 									And will this brother’s wager frankly play.

									 									Give us the foils. Come on.





						 							 Laertes 							 Come, one for me.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									I’ll be your foil, Laertes: in mine ignorance

									 									Your skill shall, like a star i’ the darkest night,

									 									Stick fiery off indeed.





						 							 Laertes 							 You mock me, sir.

						 							 Hamlet 							 No, by this hand.

						 							 King 							 								 									Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,

									 									You know the wager?





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Very well, my lord;

									 									Your grace hath laid the odds o’ the weaker side.





						 							 King 							 								 									I do not fear it; I have seen you both:

									 									But since he is better’d, we have therefore odds.





						 							 Laertes 							 This is too heavy, let me see another.

						 							 Hamlet 							 This likes me well. These foils have all a length? They prepare to play.

						 							 Osric 							 Ay, my good lord.

						 							 King 							 								 									Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.

									 									If Hamlet give the first or second hit,

									 									Or quit in answer of the third exchange,

									 									Let all the battlements their ordnance fire;

									 									The king shall drink to Hamlet’s better breath;

									 									And in the cup an union shall he throw,

									 									Richer than that which four successive kings

									 									In Denmark’s crown have worn. Give me the cups;

									 									And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,

									 									The trumpet to the cannoneer without,

									 									The cannons to the heavens, the heavens to earth,

									 									“Now the king drinks to Hamlet.” Come, begin:

									 									And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.





						 							 Hamlet 							 Come on, sir.

						 							 Laertes 							 Come, my lord. They play.

						 							 Hamlet 							 One.

						 							 Laertes 							 No.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Judgment.

						 							 Osric 							 A hit, a very palpable hit.

						 							 Laertes 							 Well; again.

						 							 King 							 								 									Stay; give me drink. Hamlet, this pearl is thine;

									 									Here’s to thy health. Trumpets sound, and cannon shot off within. Give him the cup.





						 							 Hamlet 							 I’ll play this bout first; set it by awhile. Come. They play. Another hit; what say you?

						 							 Laertes 							 A touch, a touch, I do confess.

						 							 King 							 Our son shall win.

						 							 Queen 							 								 									He’s fat, and scant of breath.

									 									Here, Hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows:

									 									The queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.





						 							 Hamlet 							 Good madam!

						 							 King 							 Gertrude, do not drink.

						 							 Queen 							 I will, my lord; I pray you, pardon me.

						 							 King 							 Aside. It is the poison’d cup: it is too late.

						 							 Hamlet 							 I dare not drink yet, madam; by and by.

						 							 Queen 							 Come, let me wipe thy face.

						 							 Laertes 							 My lord, I’ll hit him now.

						 							 King 							 I do not think’t.

						 							 Laertes 							 Aside. And yet ’tis almost ’gainst my conscience.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Come, for the third, Laertes: you but dally;

									 									I pray you, pass with your best violence;

									 									I am afeard you make a wanton of me.





						 							 Laertes 							 Say you so? come on. They play.

						 							 Osric 							 Nothing, neither way.

						 							 Laertes 							 Have at you now! Laertes wounds Hamlet; then, in scuffling, they change rapiers, and Hamlet wounds Laertes.

						 							 King 							 Part them; they are incensed.

						 							 Hamlet 							 Nay, come, again. The Queen falls.

						 							 Osric 							 Look to the queen there, ho!

						 							 Horatio 							 They bleed on both sides. How is it, my lord?

						 							 Osric 							 How is’t, Laertes?

						 							 Laertes 							 								 									Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric;

									 									I am justly kill’d with mine own treachery.





						 							 Hamlet 							 How does the queen?

						 							 King 							 She swounds to see them bleed.

						 							 Queen 							 								 									No, no, the drink, the drink—O my dear Hamlet—

									 									The drink, the drink! I am poison’d. Dies.





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									O villany! Ho! let the door be lock’d:

									 									Treachery! Seek it out.





						 							 Laertes 							 								 									It is here, Hamlet: Hamlet, thou art slain;

									 									No medicine in the world can do thee good;

									 									In thee there is not half an hour of life;

									 									The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,

									 									Unbated and envenom’d: the foul practice

									 									Hath turn’d itself on me; lo, here I lie,

									 									Never to rise again: thy mother’s poison’d:

									 									I can no more: the king, the king’s to blame.





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									The point envenom’d too!

									 									Then, venom, to thy work. Stabs the King.





						 							 All 							 Treason! treason!

						 							 King 							 O, yet defend me, friends; I am but hurt.

						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Here, thou incestuous, murderous, damned Dane,

									 									Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?

									 									Follow my mother. King dies.





						 							 Laertes 							 								 									He is justly served;

									 									It is a poison temper’d by himself.

									 									Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet:

									 									Mine and my father’s death come not upon thee,

									 									Nor thine on me! Dies.





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									Heaven make thee free of it! I follow thee.

									 									I am dead, Horatio. Wretched queen, adieu!

									 									You that look pale and tremble at this chance,

									 									That are but mutes or audience to this act,

									 									Had I but time—as this fell sergeant, death,

									 									Is strict in his arrest—O, I could tell you—

									 									But let it be. Horatio, I am dead;

									 									Thou livest; report me and my cause aright

									 									To the unsatisfied.





						 							 Horatio 							 								 									Never believe it:

									 									I am more an antique Roman than a Dane:

									 									Here’s yet some liquor left.





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									As thou’rt a man,

									 									Give me the cup: let go; by heaven, I’ll have’t.

									 									O good Horatio, what a wounded name,

									 									Things standing thus unknown, shall live behind me!

									 									If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,

									 									Absent thee from felicity awhile,

									 									And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain,

									 									To tell my story. March afar off, and shot within. What warlike noise is this?





						 							 Osric 							 								 									Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,

									 									To the ambassadors of England gives

									 									This warlike volley.





						 							 Hamlet 							 								 									O, I die, Horatio;

									 									The potent poison quite o’er-crows my spirit:

									 									I cannot live to hear the news from England;

									 									But I do prophesy the election lights

									 									On Fortinbras: he has my dying voice;

									 									So tell him, with the occurrents, more and less,

									 									Which have solicited. The rest is silence. Dies.





						 							 Horatio 							 								 									Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince;

									 									And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest!

									 									Why does the drum come hither? March within.





						 							 							 								Enter Fortinbras, the English Ambassadors, and others.

						 							 Prince Fortinbras 							 Where is this sight?

						 							 Horatio 							 								 									What is it ye would see?

									 									If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.





						 							 Prince Fortinbras 							 								 									This quarry cries on havoc. O proud death,

									 									What feast is toward in thine eternal cell,

									 									That thou so many princes at a shot

									 									So bloodily hast struck?





						 							 First Ambassador 							 								 									The sight is dismal;

									 									And our affairs from England come too late:

									 									The ears are senseless that should give us hearing,

									 									To tell him his commandment is fulfill’d,

									 									That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead:

									 									Where should we have our thanks?





						 							 Horatio 							 								 									Not from his mouth,

									 									Had it the ability of life to thank you:

									 									He never gave commandment for their death.

									 									But since, so jump upon this bloody question,

									 									You from the Polack wars, and you from England,

									 									Are here arrived give order that these bodies

									 									High on a stage be placed to the view;

									 									And let me speak to the yet unknowing world

									 									How these things came about: so shall you hear

									 									Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts,

									 									Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters,

									 									Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause,

									 									And, in this upshot, purposes mistook

									 									Fall’n on the inventors’ heads: all this can I

									 									Truly deliver.





						 							 Prince Fortinbras 							 								 									Let us haste to hear it,

									 									And call the noblest to the audience.

									 									For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune:

									 									I have some rights of memory in this kingdom,

									 									Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.





						 							 Horatio 							 								 									Of that I shall have also cause to speak,

									 									And from his mouth whose voice will draw on more:

									 									But let this same be presently perform’d,

									 									Even while men’s minds are wild; lest more mischance,

									 									On plots and errors, happen.





						 							 Prince Fortinbras 							 								 									Let four captains

									 									Bear Hamlet, like a soldier, to the stage;

									 									For he was likely, had he been put on,

									 									To have proved most royally: and, for his passage,

									 									The soldiers’ music and the rites of war

									 									Speak loudly for him.

									 									Take up the bodies: such a sight as this

									 									Becomes the field, but here shows much amiss.

									 									Go, bid the soldiers shoot. A dead march. Exeunt, bearing off the dead bodies; after which a peal of ordnance is shot off.