ORIGINAL	CONTEXT	TRANSLATED
done, When the battle's lost and won.	When the hurlyburly's done, When the battle's lost and won.	over, when the battle is lost or won.

meet with Macbeth.	There to meet with Macbeth.	Meet with Macbeth.

Hover through the fog and filthy air.	Fair is foul, and foul is fair: Hover through the fog and filthy air.	Fly through the fog and dirty air.

the fog and filthy air	Fair is foul, and foul is fair: Hover through the fog and filthy air.	the fog and dirty air

report, As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt The newest state.	What bloody man is that? He can report, As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt The newest state.	report on the latest developments of the rebellion, as his condition suggests.

a good and hardy soldier	This is the sergeant Who like a good and hardy soldier fought ' Gainst my captivity.	a good and tough soldier

sergeant Who like a good and hardy soldier fought '	This is the sergeant Who like a good and hardy soldier fought ' Gainst my captivity.	sergeant who fought like a good and brave soldier

Hail, brave friend!	Gainst my captivity. Hail, brave friend! Say to the king the knowledge of the broil As thou didst leave it.	Hello, brave friend!

knowledge of the broil As thou didst leave it.	Hail, brave friend! Say to the king the knowledge of the broil As thou didst leave it.	Tell the king what you know about the battle, just as you left it.

cling together And choke their art.	Doubtful it stood; As two spent swimmers, that do cling together And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald— Worthy to be a rebel, for to that The multiplying villanies of nature Do swarm upon him—from the western isles Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied; And fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling, Show'd like a rebel's whore: but all's too weak: For brave Macbeth—well he deserves that name—	holding onto each other and hindering their ability to swim.

two spent swimmers	Doubtful it stood; As two spent swimmers, that do cling together And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald— Worthy to be a rebel, for to that The multiplying villanies of nature Do swarm upon him—from the western isles Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied; And fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling, Show'd like a rebel's whore: but all's too weak: For brave Macbeth—well he deserves that name—	two exhausted swimmers

villanies of nature Do swarm upon him—from the western isles Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied; And fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling, Show'd like a rebel's whore: but all's too weak: For brave Macbeth—well he deserves that name—	Doubtful it stood; As two spent swimmers, that do cling together And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald— Worthy to be a rebel, for to that The multiplying villanies of nature Do swarm upon him—from the western isles Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied; And fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling, Show'd like a rebel's whore: but all's too weak: For brave Macbeth—well he deserves that name— Disdaining fortune, with his brandish'd steel, Which smoked with bloody execution, Like valour's minion carved out his passage Till he faced the slave;	evil traits seem to gather around him—he gets soldiers from the western isles; And luck, favoring his wicked fight, looked like a prostitute for a rebel: but it was all too weak. For brave Macbeth—he deserves that title—

brave Macbeth	Doubtful it stood; As two spent swimmers, that do cling together And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald— Worthy to be a rebel, for to that The multiplying villanies of nature Do swarm upon him—from the western isles Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied; And fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling, Show'd like a rebel's whore: but all's too weak: For brave Macbeth—well he deserves that name— Disdaining fortune, with his brandish'd steel, Which smoked with bloody execution, Like valour's minion carved out his passage Till he faced the slave;	brave Macbeth

a rebel's whore	Doubtful it stood; As two spent swimmers, that do cling together And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald— Worthy to be a rebel, for to that The multiplying villanies of nature Do swarm upon him—from the western isles Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied; And fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling, Show'd like a rebel's whore: but all's too weak: For brave Macbeth—well he deserves that name— Disdaining fortune, with his brandish'd steel, Which smoked with bloody execution, Like valour's minion carved out his passage Till he faced the slave;	a rebel's prostitute

The multiplying villanies	Doubtful it stood; As two spent swimmers, that do cling together And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald— Worthy to be a rebel, for to that The multiplying villanies of nature Do swarm upon him—from the western isles Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied; And fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling, Show'd like a rebel's whore: but all's too weak: For brave Macbeth—well he deserves that name— Disdaining fortune, with his brandish'd steel, Which smoked with bloody execution, Like valour's minion carved out his passage Till he faced the slave;	The many evil traits

The merciless Macdonwald	Doubtful it stood; As two spent swimmers, that do cling together And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald— Worthy to be a rebel, for to that The multiplying villanies of nature Do swarm upon him—from the western isles Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied; And fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling, Show'd like a rebel's whore: but all's too weak: For brave Macbeth—well he deserves that name— Disdaining fortune, with his brandish'd steel, Which smoked with bloody execution, Like valour's minion carved out his passage Till he faced the slave;	The ruthless Macdonwald

his damned quarrel	Doubtful it stood; As two spent swimmers, that do cling together And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald— Worthy to be a rebel, for to that The multiplying villanies of nature Do swarm upon him—from the western isles Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied; And fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling, Show'd like a rebel's whore: but all's too weak: For brave Macbeth—well he deserves that name— Disdaining fortune, with his brandish'd steel, Which smoked with bloody execution, Like valour's minion carved out his passage Till he faced the slave;	his evil cause

his brandish'd steel	The merciless Macdonwald— Worthy to be a rebel, for to that The multiplying villanies of nature Do swarm upon him—from the western isles Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied; And fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling, Show'd like a rebel's whore: but all's too weak: For brave Macbeth—well he deserves that name— Disdaining fortune, with his brandish'd steel, Which smoked with bloody execution, Like valour's minion carved out his passage Till he faced the slave;	his drawn sword

carved out his passage Till he faced the slave;	The merciless Macdonwald— Worthy to be a rebel, for to that The multiplying villanies of nature Do swarm upon him—from the western isles Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied; And fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling, Show'd like a rebel's whore: but all's too weak: For brave Macbeth—well he deserves that name— Disdaining fortune, with his brandish'd steel, Which smoked with bloody execution, Like valour's minion carved out his passage Till he faced the slave;	cut his way through the enemy until he confronted the rebel.

valour's minion	The merciless Macdonwald— Worthy to be a rebel, for to that The multiplying villanies of nature Do swarm upon him—from the western isles Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied; And fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling, Show'd like a rebel's whore: but all's too weak: For brave Macbeth—well he deserves that name— Disdaining fortune, with his brandish'd steel, Which smoked with bloody execution, Like valour's minion carved out his passage Till he faced the slave;	brave and favored by courage

bade farewell to him, Till he unseam'd him from the nave to the chaps, And fix'd his head upon our battlements.	Which ne'er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him, Till he unseam'd him from the nave to the chaps, And fix'd his head upon our battlements.	Said goodbye to him until he split him open from his navel to his jaws and put his head on our castle walls.

O valiant cousin	O valiant cousin! worthy gentleman!	Oh, brave cousin!

direful thunders break	As whence the sun 'gins his reflection Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break, So from that spring whence comfort seem'd to come Discomfort swells. Mark, king of Scotland, mark: No sooner justice had with valour arm'd Compell'd these skipping kerns to trust their heels, But the Norweyan lord surveying vantage, With furbish'd arms and new supplies of men Began a fresh assault.	terrible thunder erupts

reflection Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break, So from that spring whence comfort seem'd to come Discomfort swells.	As whence the sun 'gins his reflection Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break, So from that spring whence comfort seem'd to come Discomfort swells. Mark, king of Scotland, mark: No sooner justice had with valour arm'd Compell'd these skipping kerns to trust their heels, But the Norweyan lord surveying vantage, With furbish'd arms and new supplies of men Began a fresh assault.	Just as storms and terrible thunder come from where the sun rises, so too does trouble arise from where comfort seemed to originate.

Shipwrecking storms	As whence the sun 'gins his reflection Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break, So from that spring whence comfort seem'd to come Discomfort swells. Mark, king of Scotland, mark: No sooner justice had with valour arm'd Compell'd these skipping kerns to trust their heels, But the Norweyan lord surveying vantage, With furbish'd arms and new supplies of men Began a fresh assault.	Storms that cause shipwrecks

valour arm'd	As whence the sun 'gins his reflection Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break, So from that spring whence comfort seem'd to come Discomfort swells. Mark, king of Scotland, mark: No sooner justice had with valour arm'd Compell'd these skipping kerns to trust their heels, But the Norweyan lord surveying vantage, With furbish'd arms and new supplies of men Began a fresh assault.	armed with courage

the Norweyan lord surveying vantage	As whence the sun 'gins his reflection Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break, So from that spring whence comfort seem'd to come Discomfort swells. Mark, king of Scotland, mark: No sooner justice had with valour arm'd Compell'd these skipping kerns to trust their heels, But the Norweyan lord surveying vantage, With furbish'd arms and new supplies of men Began a fresh assault.	The Norwegian king, seeing an opportunity,

these skipping kerns	As whence the sun 'gins his reflection Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break, So from that spring whence comfort seem'd to come Discomfort swells. Mark, king of Scotland, mark: No sooner justice had with valour arm'd Compell'd these skipping kerns to trust their heels, But the Norweyan lord surveying vantage, With furbish'd arms and new supplies of men Began a fresh assault.	these lightly-armed Irish foot soldiers

furbish'd arms	As whence the sun 'gins his reflection Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break, So from that spring whence comfort seem'd to come Discomfort swells. Mark, king of Scotland, mark: No sooner justice had with valour arm'd Compell'd these skipping kerns to trust their heels, But the Norweyan lord surveying vantage, With furbish'd arms and new supplies of men Began a fresh assault.	Polished armor

captains, Macbeth and Banquo?	Dismay'd not this Our captains, Macbeth and Banquo?	Did this discourage our captains, Macbeth and Banquo?

hare the lion.	Yes; As sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion. If I say sooth, I must report they were As cannons overcharged with double cracks, so they Doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe: Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds, Or memorise another Golgotha, I cannot tell.	Like a hare compared to a lion.

As sparrows	Yes; As sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion. If I say sooth, I must report they were As cannons overcharged with double cracks, so they Doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe: Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds, Or memorise another Golgotha, I cannot tell.	Like sparrows.

say sooth, I must report they were As cannons overcharged with double cracks, so they Doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe: Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds, Or memorise another Golgotha, I cannot tell.	Yes; As sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion. If I say sooth, I must report they were As cannons overcharged with double cracks, so they Doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe: Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds, Or memorise another Golgotha, I cannot tell. But I am faint, my gashes cry for help.	To tell the truth, they fought like cannons overloaded and exploding, striking the enemy with twice the force. Unless they wanted to revel in bloody wounds or create another scene of slaughter like Golgotha, I can't explain it.

thee as thy wounds; They smack of honour both.	So well thy words become thee as thy wounds; They smack of honour both. Go get him surgeons.	as your wounds do; they both speak of honor.

thane of Ross.	The worthy thane of Ross.	Lord Ross.

The worthy thane	The worthy thane of Ross.	The worthy Thane

What a haste	What a haste looks through his eyes! So should he look That seems to speak things strange.	What a hurry.

worthy thane	Whence camest thou, worthy thane?	worthy thane

Whence camest thou	Whence camest thou, worthy thane?	Where did you come from?

thou, worthy thane?	Whence camest thou, worthy thane?	You, noble sir?

the Norweyan banners	From Fife, great king; Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky And fan our people cold. Norway himself, With terrible numbers, Assisted by that most disloyal traitor The thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict; Till that Bellona's bridegroom, lapp'd in proof, Confronted him with self-comparisons, Point against point rebellious, arm 'gainst arm.	Norwegian flags

king; Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky And fan our people cold.	From Fife, great king; Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky And fan our people cold. Norway himself, With terrible numbers, Assisted by that most disloyal traitor The thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict; Till that Bellona's bridegroom, lapp'd in proof, Confronted him with self-comparisons, Point against point rebellious, arm 'gainst arm.	King, where the Norwegian flags mock the sky and make our people feel fear.

a dismal conflict	From Fife, great king; Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky And fan our people cold. Norway himself, With terrible numbers, Assisted by that most disloyal traitor The thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict; Till that Bellona's bridegroom, lapp'd in proof, Confronted him with self-comparisons, Point against point rebellious, arm 'gainst arm. Curbing his lavish spirit: and, to conclude, The victory fell on us.	A terrible battle

Bellona's bridegroom	From Fife, great king; Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky And fan our people cold. Norway himself, With terrible numbers, Assisted by that most disloyal traitor The thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict; Till that Bellona's bridegroom, lapp'd in proof, Confronted him with self-comparisons, Point against point rebellious, arm 'gainst arm. Curbing his lavish spirit: and, to conclude, The victory fell on us.	The god of war

that most disloyal traitor	From Fife, great king; Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky And fan our people cold. Norway himself, With terrible numbers, Assisted by that most disloyal traitor The thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict; Till that Bellona's bridegroom, lapp'd in proof, Confronted him with self-comparisons, Point against point rebellious, arm 'gainst arm. Curbing his lavish spirit: and, to conclude, The victory fell on us.	that extremely disloyal traitor

Confronted him with self-comparisons, Point against point rebellious, arm 'gainst arm.	From Fife, great king; Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky And fan our people cold. Norway himself, With terrible numbers, Assisted by that most disloyal traitor The thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict; Till that Bellona's bridegroom, lapp'd in proof, Confronted him with self-comparisons, Point against point rebellious, arm 'gainst arm. Curbing his lavish spirit: and, to conclude, The victory fell on us.	He faced him with equal strength, weapon against weapon, soldier against soldier.

his lavish spirit	Norway himself, With terrible numbers, Assisted by that most disloyal traitor The thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict; Till that Bellona's bridegroom, lapp'd in proof, Confronted him with self-comparisons, Point against point rebellious, arm 'gainst arm. Curbing his lavish spirit: and, to conclude, The victory fell on us.	his excessive eagerness

disbursed at Saint Colme's inch Ten thousand dollars to our general use.	That now Sweno, the Norways' king, craves composition: Nor would we deign him burial of his men Till he disbursed at Saint Colme's inch Ten thousand dollars to our general use.	paid ten thousand dollars to us at Saint Colme's Inch for our public benefit.

Saint Colme's inch	That now Sweno, the Norways' king, craves composition: Nor would we deign him burial of his men Till he disbursed at Saint Colme's inch Ten thousand dollars to our general use.	Inchcolm

the Norways' king	That now Sweno, the Norways' king, craves composition: Nor would we deign him burial of his men Till he disbursed at Saint Colme's inch Ten thousand dollars to our general use.	The king of Norway

go pronounce his present death, And with his former title greet Macbeth.	No more that thane of Cawdor shall deceive Our bosom interest: go pronounce his present death, And with his former title greet Macbeth.	Go announce his immediate execution, and give Macbeth his old title.

Our bosom interest	No more that thane of Cawdor shall deceive Our bosom interest: go pronounce his present death, And with his former title greet Macbeth.	What we care about most.

I: 'Aroint thee, witch!'	A sailor's wife had chestnuts in her lap, And munch'd, and munch'd, and munch'd:— 'Give me,' quoth I: 'Aroint thee, witch!' the rump-fed ronyon cries.	Me: "Get away from me, witch!"

A sailor's wife	A sailor's wife had chestnuts in her lap, And munch'd, and munch'd, and munch'd:— 'Give me,' quoth I: 'Aroint thee, witch!' the rump-fed ronyon cries.	A sailor's wife

the rump-fed ronyon cries	A sailor's wife had chestnuts in her lap, And munch'd, and munch'd, and munch'd:— 'Give me,' quoth I: 'Aroint thee, witch!' the rump-fed ronyon cries. Her husband's to Aleppo gone, master o' the Tiger: But in a sieve I'll thither sail, And, like a rat without a tail, I'll do, I'll do, and I'll do.	the fat, scabby woman yells

rat without a tail, I'll do, I'll do, and I'll do.	the rump-fed ronyon cries. Her husband's to Aleppo gone, master o' the Tiger: But in a sieve I'll thither sail, And, like a rat without a tail, I'll do, I'll do, and I'll do.	a rat without a tail. I'll do it, I'll do it, and I'll do it.

Thou'rt kind	Thou'rt kind.	You're kind.

ports they blow, All the quarters that they know I' the shipman's card.	I myself have all the other, And the very ports they blow, All the quarters that they know I' the shipman's card. I will drain him dry as hay: Sleep shall neither night nor day Hang upon his pent-house lid; He shall live a man forbid:	the directions the winds blow from, all the regions marked on the sailor's map.

I' the shipman's card	I myself have all the other, And the very ports they blow, All the quarters that they know I' the shipman's card. I will drain him dry as hay: Sleep shall neither night nor day Hang upon his pent-house lid; He shall live a man forbid:	In the sailor's compass

dry as hay: Sleep shall neither night nor day Hang upon his pent-house lid; He shall live a man forbid:	I myself have all the other, And the very ports they blow, All the quarters that they know I' the shipman's card. I will drain him dry as hay: Sleep shall neither night nor day Hang upon his pent-house lid; He shall live a man forbid: Weary se'nnights nine times nine	completely exhausted: He won't sleep at all, ever; he'll be an outcast.

Weary se'nnights	I will drain him dry as hay: Sleep shall neither night nor day Hang upon his pent-house lid; He shall live a man forbid: Weary se'nnights nine times nine Shall he dwindle, peak and pine: Though his bark cannot be lost, Yet it shall be tempest-tost.	Weary weeks

lost, Yet it shall be tempest-tost.	Weary se'nnights nine times nine Shall he dwindle, peak and pine: Though his bark cannot be lost, Yet it shall be tempest-tost. Look what I have.	lost, it will be tossed about in a storm.

a pilot's thumb	Here I have a pilot's thumb, Wreck'd as homeward he did come.	a pilot's thumb

hand in hand, Posters of the sea and land, Thus do go about, about: Thrice to thine and thrice to mine And thrice again, to make up nine.	The weird sisters, hand in hand, Posters of the sea and land, Thus do go about, about: Thrice to thine and thrice to mine And thrice again, to make up nine. Peace!	Holding hands, rulers of the sea and land, This is how we go round and round: Three times for you and three times for me and three times again, to make a total of nine.

the charm's wound	Peace! the charm's wound up.	The spell is done.

is't call'd to Forres?	How far is't call'd to Forres? What are these So wither'd	How far to Forres?

How far is't	How far is't call'd to Forres? What are these So wither'd	How far is it?

wild in their attire, That look not like the inhabitants o' the earth, And yet are on't?	What are these So wither'd and so wild in their attire, That look not like the inhabitants o' the earth, And yet are on't? Live you?	dressed so strangely, they don't look like people from Earth, but they are here?

her skinny lips	or are you aught That man may question? You seem to understand me, By each at once her chappy finger laying Upon her skinny lips: you should be women, And yet your beards forbid me to interpret That you are so.	her thin lips

be women, And yet your beards forbid me to interpret That you are so.	or are you aught That man may question? You seem to understand me, By each at once her chappy finger laying Upon her skinny lips: you should be women, And yet your beards forbid me to interpret That you are so.	You should be women, but your beards make it impossible for me to believe you are.

her chappy finger	or are you aught That man may question? You seem to understand me, By each at once her chappy finger laying Upon her skinny lips: you should be women, And yet your beards forbid me to interpret That you are so.	her cracked finger

, Macbeth! hail	All hail, Macbeth! hail to thee, thane of Glamis!	, Macbeth! Greetings

hail to thee, thane of Glamis!	All hail, Macbeth! hail to thee, thane of Glamis!	Greetings, thane of Glamis!

thee, thane of Cawdor!	All hail, Macbeth, hail to thee, thane of Cawdor!	You, Thane of Cawdor!

hail, Macbeth, thou shalt be king hereafter!	All hail, Macbeth, thou shalt be king hereafter!	Hail, Macbeth, you will be king in the future!

sir, why do you start; and seem to fear Things that do sound so fair?	Good sir, why do you start; and seem to fear Things that do sound so fair? I' the name of truth, Are ye fantastical, or that indeed Which outwardly ye show?	Sir, why do you jump, and seem afraid of things that sound so good?

I' the name of truth, Are ye fantastical, or that indeed Which outwardly ye show?	Good sir, why do you start; and seem to fear Things that do sound so fair? I' the name of truth, Are ye fantastical, or that indeed Which outwardly ye show? My noble partner You greet with present grace and great prediction Of noble having and of royal hope, That he seems rapt withal: to me you speak not.	Tell me truly, are you imagining things, or are you really seeing what you appear to be seeing?

Speak then to me, who neither beg nor fear Your favours nor your hate.	My noble partner You greet with present grace and great prediction Of noble having and of royal hope, That he seems rapt withal: to me you speak not. If you can look into the seeds of time, And say which grain will grow and which will not, Speak then to me, who neither beg nor fear Your favours nor your hate.	Talk to me then, since I don't need your kindness or fear your anger.

Lesser than Macbeth, and greater.	Lesser than Macbeth, and greater.	Lesser than Macbeth, yet greater.

get kings, though thou be none: So all hail, Macbeth and Banquo!	Thou shalt get kings, though thou be none: So all hail, Macbeth and Banquo!	You will be the father of kings, even though you will not be one yourself. So all hail, Macbeth and Banquo!

all hail	Banquo and Macbeth, all hail!	Greetings!

Banquo and Macbeth, all hail!	Banquo and Macbeth, all hail!	Banquo and Macbeth, all hail!

how of Cawdor?	Stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me more: By Sinel's death I know I am thane of Glamis; But how of Cawdor? the thane of Cawdor lives, A prosperous gentleman; and to be king Stands not within the prospect of belief, No more than to be Cawdor.	What about Cawdor?

Sinel's death	Stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me more: By Sinel's death I know I am thane of Glamis; But how of Cawdor? the thane of Cawdor lives, A prosperous gentleman; and to be king Stands not within the prospect of belief, No more than to be Cawdor.	Sinel is dead.

thane of Cawdor lives, A prosperous gentleman; and to be king Stands not within the prospect of belief, No more than to be Cawdor.	Stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me more: By Sinel's death I know I am thane of Glamis; But how of Cawdor? the thane of Cawdor lives, A prosperous gentleman; and to be king Stands not within the prospect of belief, No more than to be Cawdor. Say from whence You owe this strange intelligence?	The Thane of Cawdor is alive, a successful nobleman; and the idea of me becoming king is unbelievable, just as unbelievable as me becoming Cawdor.

A prosperous gentleman	Stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me more: By Sinel's death I know I am thane of Glamis; But how of Cawdor? the thane of Cawdor lives, A prosperous gentleman; and to be king Stands not within the prospect of belief, No more than to be Cawdor. Say from whence You owe this strange intelligence?	A wealthy, successful man.

Cawdor lives	Stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me more: By Sinel's death I know I am thane of Glamis; But how of Cawdor? the thane of Cawdor lives, A prosperous gentleman; and to be king Stands not within the prospect of belief, No more than to be Cawdor. Say from whence You owe this strange intelligence?	The thane of Cawdor is still alive.

owe this strange intelligence?	the thane of Cawdor lives, A prosperous gentleman; and to be king Stands not within the prospect of belief, No more than to be Cawdor. Say from whence You owe this strange intelligence? or why Upon this blasted heath you stop our way With such prophetic greeting?	Where did you get this strange information?

stop our way With such prophetic greeting?	Say from whence You owe this strange intelligence? or why Upon this blasted heath you stop our way With such prophetic greeting? Speak, I charge you.	Why do you block our path with these prophecies?

such prophetic greeting	Say from whence You owe this strange intelligence? or why Upon this blasted heath you stop our way With such prophetic greeting? Speak, I charge you.	such a prediction

melted As breath into the wind.	Into the air; and what seem'd corporal melted As breath into the wind. Would they had stay'd!	vanished like breath in the wind.

what seem'd corporal	Into the air; and what seem'd corporal melted As breath into the wind. Would they had stay'd!	what seemed real

the insane root	Were such things here as we do speak about? Or have we eaten on the insane root That takes the reason prisoner?	A root that makes you crazy.

root That takes the reason prisoner?	Were such things here as we do speak about? Or have we eaten on the insane root That takes the reason prisoner?	a root that makes you lose your mind?

thane of Cawdor too: went it not so?	And thane of Cawdor too: went it not so?	Also the Thane of Cawdor: wasn't that right?

the selfsame tune	To the selfsame tune and words. Who's here?	The same tune.

Macbeth, The news of thy success; and when he reads Thy personal venture in the rebels' fight, His wonders and his praises do contend Which should be thine or his: silenced with that,	The king hath happily received, Macbeth, The news of thy success; and when he reads Thy personal venture in the rebels' fight, His wonders and his praises do contend Which should be thine or his: silenced with that, In viewing o'er the rest o' the selfsame day, He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks, Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make, Strange images of death.	Macbeth, the king is pleased to hear of your victory. When he reads of your bravery in the fight against the rebels, he can't decide whether to praise you more or be more amazed. He is speechless.

the selfsame day	The king hath happily received, Macbeth, The news of thy success; and when he reads Thy personal venture in the rebels' fight, His wonders and his praises do contend Which should be thine or his: silenced with that, In viewing o'er the rest o' the selfsame day, He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks, Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make, Strange images of death. As thick as hail Came post with post; and every one did bear Thy praises in his kingdom's great defence, And pour'd them down before him.	the very same day

finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks, Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make, Strange images of death.	The king hath happily received, Macbeth, The news of thy success; and when he reads Thy personal venture in the rebels' fight, His wonders and his praises do contend Which should be thine or his: silenced with that, In viewing o'er the rest o' the selfsame day, He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks, Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make, Strange images of death. As thick as hail Came post with post; and every one did bear Thy praises in his kingdom's great defence, And pour'd them down before him.	found you fighting bravely in the Norwegian army, not afraid of the terrible death you were causing.

Nothing afeard	The king hath happily received, Macbeth, The news of thy success; and when he reads Thy personal venture in the rebels' fight, His wonders and his praises do contend Which should be thine or his: silenced with that, In viewing o'er the rest o' the selfsame day, He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks, Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make, Strange images of death. As thick as hail Came post with post; and every one did bear Thy praises in his kingdom's great defence, And pour'd them down before him.	Not afraid at all.

pour'd them down before him.	In viewing o'er the rest o' the selfsame day, He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks, Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make, Strange images of death. As thick as hail Came post with post; and every one did bear Thy praises in his kingdom's great defence, And pour'd them down before him.	showered praise upon him.

his kingdom's great defence	In viewing o'er the rest o' the selfsame day, He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks, Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make, Strange images of death. As thick as hail Came post with post; and every one did bear Thy praises in his kingdom's great defence, And pour'd them down before him.	defending his kingdom well

herald thee into his sight, Not pay thee.	We are sent To give thee from our royal master thanks; Only to herald thee into his sight, Not pay thee.	escort you to see him, not pay you.

a greater honour	And, for an earnest of a greater honour, He bade me, from him, call thee thane of Cawdor: In which addition, hail, most worthy thane! For it is thine.	a bigger honor

earnest of a greater honour, He bade me, from him, call thee thane of Cawdor: In which addition, hail, most worthy thane!	And, for an earnest of a greater honour, He bade me, from him, call thee thane of Cawdor: In which addition, hail, most worthy thane! For it is thine.	As a down payment on even greater honors, he told me to announce that you are now the Thane of Cawdor. So, congratulations, most worthy Thane! It's yours now.

most worthy thane	And, for an earnest of a greater honour, He bade me, from him, call thee thane of Cawdor: In which addition, hail, most worthy thane! For it is thine.	Most worthy Thane.

borrow'd robes	The thane of Cawdor lives: why do you dress me In borrow'd robes?	Stolen titles

dress me In borrow'd robes?	The thane of Cawdor lives: why do you dress me In borrow'd robes?	Why are you calling me by a title that isn't mine?

his country's wreck	Who was the thane lives yet; But under heavy judgment bears that life Which he deserves to lose. Whether he was combined With those of Norway, or did line the rebel With hidden help and vantage, or that with both He labour'd in his country's wreck, I know not; But treasons capital, confess'd and proved, Have overthrown him.	the destruction of his country

capital, confess'd and proved, Have overthrown him.	Who was the thane lives yet; But under heavy judgment bears that life Which he deserves to lose. Whether he was combined With those of Norway, or did line the rebel With hidden help and vantage, or that with both He labour'd in his country's wreck, I know not; But treasons capital, confess'd and proved, Have overthrown him.	He has been found guilty of major treason, confessed, and proven, and that has destroyed him.

treasons capital	Who was the thane lives yet; But under heavy judgment bears that life Which he deserves to lose. Whether he was combined With those of Norway, or did line the rebel With hidden help and vantage, or that with both He labour'd in his country's wreck, I know not; But treasons capital, confess'd and proved, Have overthrown him.	major acts of treason

both He labour'd	Who was the thane lives yet; But under heavy judgment bears that life Which he deserves to lose. Whether he was combined With those of Norway, or did line the rebel With hidden help and vantage, or that with both He labour'd in his country's wreck, I know not; But treasons capital, confess'd and proved, Have overthrown him.	he worked with both sides

[Aside] Glamis	[Aside] Glamis, and thane of Cawdor! The greatest is behind.	Glamis

thane of Cawdor!	[Aside] Glamis, and thane of Cawdor! The greatest is behind.	The Thane of Cawdor!

hope your children shall be kings, When those that gave the thane of Cawdor to me Promised no less to them?	Thanks for your pains. Do you not hope your children shall be kings, When those that gave the thane of Cawdor to me Promised no less to them?	Don't you hope your children will be kings, since those who made me the Thane of Cawdor promised them even more?

enkindle you unto the crown, Besides the thane of Cawdor.	That trusted home Might yet enkindle you unto the crown, Besides the thane of Cawdor. But 'tis strange: And oftentimes, to win us to our harm, The instruments of darkness tell us truths, Win us with honest trifles, to betray's In deepest consequence.	make you want to be king, in addition to making you Thane of Cawdor.

honest trifles	That trusted home Might yet enkindle you unto the crown, Besides the thane of Cawdor. But 'tis strange: And oftentimes, to win us to our harm, The instruments of darkness tell us truths, Win us with honest trifles, to betray's In deepest consequence. Cousins, a word, I pray you.	small truths

Win us with honest trifles, to betray's In deepest consequence.	That trusted home Might yet enkindle you unto the crown, Besides the thane of Cawdor. But 'tis strange: And oftentimes, to win us to our harm, The instruments of darkness tell us truths, Win us with honest trifles, to betray's In deepest consequence. Cousins, a word, I pray you.	They trick us by telling us small truths, which then leads us to make decisions that have huge, negative consequences.

Cousins, a word, I pray you.	But 'tis strange: And oftentimes, to win us to our harm, The instruments of darkness tell us truths, Win us with honest trifles, to betray's In deepest consequence. Cousins, a word, I pray you.	Cousins, can I talk to you for a moment?

prologues to the swelling act Of the imperial theme.—I thank you, gentlemen.	[Aside] Two truths are told, As happy prologues to the swelling act Of the imperial theme.—I thank you, gentlemen. Cannot be ill, cannot be good: if ill, Why hath it given me earnest of success, Commencing in a truth?	Like happy introductions to the main story about becoming king. Thanks, everyone.

happy prologues	[Aside] Two truths are told, As happy prologues to the swelling act Of the imperial theme.—I thank you, gentlemen. Cannot be ill, cannot be good: if ill, Why hath it given me earnest of success, Commencing in a truth?	Good beginnings.

the swelling act	[Aside] Two truths are told, As happy prologues to the swelling act Of the imperial theme.—I thank you, gentlemen. Cannot be ill, cannot be good: if ill, Why hath it given me earnest of success, Commencing in a truth?	the main part of the play

Commencing in a truth?	[Aside] Two truths are told, As happy prologues to the swelling act Of the imperial theme.—I thank you, gentlemen. Cannot be ill, cannot be good: if ill, Why hath it given me earnest of success, Commencing in a truth? I am thane of Cawdor: If good, why do I yield to that suggestion Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair And make my seated heart knock at my ribs, Against the use of nature?	Starting with something true?

knock at my ribs, Against the use of nature?	Cannot be ill, cannot be good: if ill, Why hath it given me earnest of success, Commencing in a truth? I am thane of Cawdor: If good, why do I yield to that suggestion Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair And make my seated heart knock at my ribs, Against the use of nature? Present fears Are less than horrible imaginings:	make my heart pound so hard it feels unnatural?

Whose horrid image	Cannot be ill, cannot be good: if ill, Why hath it given me earnest of success, Commencing in a truth? I am thane of Cawdor: If good, why do I yield to that suggestion Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair And make my seated heart knock at my ribs, Against the use of nature? Present fears Are less than horrible imaginings:	The terrible thought

my seated heart	Cannot be ill, cannot be good: if ill, Why hath it given me earnest of success, Commencing in a truth? I am thane of Cawdor: If good, why do I yield to that suggestion Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair And make my seated heart knock at my ribs, Against the use of nature? Present fears Are less than horrible imaginings:	My firmly planted heart.

less than horrible imaginings:	I am thane of Cawdor: If good, why do I yield to that suggestion Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair And make my seated heart knock at my ribs, Against the use of nature? Present fears Are less than horrible imaginings: My thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical, Shakes so my single state of man that function Is smother'd in surmise, and nothing is But what is not.	not as bad as what I'm imagining.

horrible imaginings	I am thane of Cawdor: If good, why do I yield to that suggestion Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair And make my seated heart knock at my ribs, Against the use of nature? Present fears Are less than horrible imaginings: My thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical, Shakes so my single state of man that function Is smother'd in surmise, and nothing is But what is not.	terrible fantasies

thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical, Shakes so my single state of man that function Is smother'd in surmise, and nothing is But what is not.	Present fears Are less than horrible imaginings: My thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical, Shakes so my single state of man that function Is smother'd in surmise, and nothing is But what is not.	The thought of something so unreal as murder shakes me so deeply that I am paralyzed by speculation, and reality is replaced by what is not real.

crown me, Without my stir.	If chance will have me king, why, chance may crown me, Without my stir.	crown me without me having to do anything.

cleave not to their mould But with the aid of use.	New horrors come upon him, Like our strange garments, cleave not to their mould But with the aid of use.	Don't fit them at first, but become comfortable with use.

our strange garments	New horrors come upon him, Like our strange garments, cleave not to their mould But with the aid of use.	Our unusual clothes

my dull brain	Give me your favour: my dull brain was wrought With things forgotten. Kind gentlemen, your pains Are register'd where every day I turn The leaf to read them.	my forgetful mind

Think upon what hath chanced, and, at more time, The interim having weigh'd it, let us speak Our free hearts each to other.	Let us toward the king. Think upon what hath chanced, and, at more time, The interim having weigh'd it, let us speak Our free hearts each to other.	Think about what has happened, and after we've had time to consider it, let's speak honestly with each other.

execution done on Cawdor?	Is execution done on Cawdor? Are not Those in commission yet return'd?	Has Cawdor been executed?

Those in commission yet return'd?	Is execution done on Cawdor? Are not Those in commission yet return'd?	Have the people sent to do the job returned yet?

a careless trifle	My liege, They are not yet come back. But I have spoke With one that saw him die: who did report That very frankly he confess'd his treasons, Implored your highness' pardon and set forth A deep repentance: nothing in his life Became him like the leaving it; he died As one that had been studied in his death To throw away the dearest thing he owed, As 'twere a careless trifle.	something worthless

your highness' pardon	My liege, They are not yet come back. But I have spoke With one that saw him die: who did report That very frankly he confess'd his treasons, Implored your highness' pardon and set forth A deep repentance: nothing in his life Became him like the leaving it; he died As one that had been studied in his death To throw away the dearest thing he owed, As 'twere a careless trifle.	your highness' forgiveness

A deep repentance	My liege, They are not yet come back. But I have spoke With one that saw him die: who did report That very frankly he confess'd his treasons, Implored your highness' pardon and set forth A deep repentance: nothing in his life Became him like the leaving it; he died As one that had been studied in his death To throw away the dearest thing he owed, As 'twere a careless trifle.	A profound regret.

twere a careless trifle.	My liege, They are not yet come back. But I have spoke With one that saw him die: who did report That very frankly he confess'd his treasons, Implored your highness' pardon and set forth A deep repentance: nothing in his life Became him like the leaving it; he died As one that had been studied in his death To throw away the dearest thing he owed, As 'twere a careless trifle.	as if it were a worthless thing.

gentleman on whom I built An absolute trust.	There's no art To find the mind's construction in the face: He was a gentleman on whom I built An absolute trust. O worthiest cousin!	a gentleman I trusted completely.

the mind's construction	There's no art To find the mind's construction in the face: He was a gentleman on whom I built An absolute trust. O worthiest cousin!	what someone is thinking

O worthiest cousin	There's no art To find the mind's construction in the face: He was a gentleman on whom I built An absolute trust. O worthiest cousin! The sin of my ingratitude even now Was heavy on me: thou art so far before That swiftest wing of recompense is slow To overtake thee.	You are the best cousin.

wing of recompense is slow To overtake thee.	O worthiest cousin! The sin of my ingratitude even now Was heavy on me: thou art so far before That swiftest wing of recompense is slow To overtake thee. Would thou hadst less deserved, That the proportion both of thanks and payment Might have been mine!	Trying to repay you is like trying to catch up with someone incredibly fast – I'm just too slow.

loyalty I owe, In doing it, pays itself.	The service and the loyalty I owe, In doing it, pays itself. Your highness' part Is to receive our duties; and our duties Are to your throne and state children and servants, Which do but what they should, by doing every thing Safe toward your love and honour.	The loyalty I give pays for itself in the act of giving it.

Your highness' part	The service and the loyalty I owe, In doing it, pays itself. Your highness' part Is to receive our duties; and our duties Are to your throne and state children and servants, Which do but what they should, by doing every thing Safe toward your love and honour.	Your role, your highness,

Safe toward your love and honour.	The service and the loyalty I owe, In doing it, pays itself. Your highness' part Is to receive our duties; and our duties Are to your throne and state children and servants, Which do but what they should, by doing every thing Safe toward your love and honour.	Safe in protecting your love and honor.

hold thee to my heart.	Welcome hither: I have begun to plant thee, and will labour To make thee full of growing. Noble Banquo, That hast no less deserved, nor must be known No less to have done so, let me enfold thee And hold thee to my heart.	hug you close to my heart.

Noble Banquo	Welcome hither: I have begun to plant thee, and will labour To make thee full of growing. Noble Banquo, That hast no less deserved, nor must be known No less to have done so, let me enfold thee And hold thee to my heart.	Noble Banquo

My plenteous joys	My plenteous joys, Wanton in fulness, seek to hide themselves In drops of sorrow. Sons, kinsmen, thanes, And you whose places are the nearest, know We will establish our estate upon Our eldest, Malcolm, whom we name hereafter The Prince of Cumberland; which honour must Not unaccompanied invest him only, But signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine On all deservers.	My abundant happiness

Wanton in fulness, seek to hide themselves In drops of sorrow.	My plenteous joys, Wanton in fulness, seek to hide themselves In drops of sorrow. Sons, kinsmen, thanes, And you whose places are the nearest, know We will establish our estate upon Our eldest, Malcolm, whom we name hereafter The Prince of Cumberland; which honour must Not unaccompanied invest him only, But signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine On all deservers.	My overflowing happiness tries to disguise itself with hints of sadness.

eldest, Malcolm, whom we name hereafter The Prince of Cumberland; which honour must Not unaccompanied invest him only, But signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine On all deservers.	My plenteous joys, Wanton in fulness, seek to hide themselves In drops of sorrow. Sons, kinsmen, thanes, And you whose places are the nearest, know We will establish our estate upon Our eldest, Malcolm, whom we name hereafter The Prince of Cumberland; which honour must Not unaccompanied invest him only, But signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine On all deservers. From hence to Inverness, And bind us further to you.	my eldest son, Malcolm, who from now on we will call the Prince of Cumberland. This title won't be the only thing he gets; we will also reward all those who deserve it with honors and signs of our favor, like shining stars.

labour, which is not used for you: I'll be myself the harbinger and make joyful The hearing of my wife with your approach; So humbly take my leave.	The rest is labour, which is not used for you: I'll be myself the harbinger and make joyful The hearing of my wife with your approach; So humbly take my leave.	work that isn't for you. I'll go ahead and announce your arrival to my wife and make her happy to hear you're coming. I'll take my leave now.

joyful The hearing	The rest is labour, which is not used for you: I'll be myself the harbinger and make joyful The hearing of my wife with your approach; So humbly take my leave.	Joyful news.

My worthy Cawdor	My worthy Cawdor!	My honored Cawdor!

Prince of Cumberland!	[Aside] The Prince of Cumberland! that is a step On which I must fall down, or else o'erleap, For in my way it lies.	Prince of Cumberland!

fall down, or else o'erleap, For in my way it lies.	[Aside] The Prince of Cumberland! that is a step On which I must fall down, or else o'erleap, For in my way it lies. Stars, hide your fires; Let not light see my black and deep desires: The eye wink at the hand; yet let that be, Which the eye fears, when it is done, to see.	I must give up or jump over it, because it's blocking my path.

my black and deep desires	that is a step On which I must fall down, or else o'erleap, For in my way it lies. Stars, hide your fires; Let not light see my black and deep desires: The eye wink at the hand; yet let that be, Which the eye fears, when it is done, to see.	my dark and secret wishes

fears, when it is done, to see.	that is a step On which I must fall down, or else o'erleap, For in my way it lies. Stars, hide your fires; Let not light see my black and deep desires: The eye wink at the hand; yet let that be, Which the eye fears, when it is done, to see.	fears to look at after it's done.

is a banquet to me.	True, worthy Banquo; he is full so valiant, And in his commendations I am fed; It is a banquet to me. Let's after him, Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome: It is a peerless kinsman.	It's a feast for me.

True, worthy Banquo	True, worthy Banquo; he is full so valiant, And in his commendations I am fed; It is a banquet to me. Let's after him, Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome: It is a peerless kinsman.	That's right, good Banquo.

a peerless kinsman	True, worthy Banquo; he is full so valiant, And in his commendations I am fed; It is a banquet to me. Let's after him, Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome: It is a peerless kinsman.	an unmatched relative

is a peerless kinsman.	True, worthy Banquo; he is full so valiant, And in his commendations I am fed; It is a banquet to me. Let's after him, Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome: It is a peerless kinsman.	He's an unmatched relative.

mortal knowledge	'They met me in the day of success: and I have learned by the perfectest report, they have more in them than mortal knowledge. When I burned in desire to question them further, they made themselves air, into which they vanished.	human knowledge

more in them than mortal knowledge.	'They met me in the day of success: and I have learned by the perfectest report, they have more in them than mortal knowledge. When I burned in desire to question them further, they made themselves air, into which they vanished.	They know more than humans possibly could.

wonder of it, came missives from the king, who all-hailed me 'Thane of Cawdor;' by which title, before, these weird sisters saluted me, and referred me to the coming on of time, with 'Hail, king that shalt be!'	When I burned in desire to question them further, they made themselves air, into which they vanished. Whiles I stood rapt in the wonder of it, came missives from the king, who all-hailed me 'Thane of Cawdor;' by which title, before, these weird sisters saluted me, and referred me to the coming on of time, with 'Hail, king that shalt be!' This have I thought good to deliver thee, my dearest partner of greatness, that thou mightst not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being ignorant of what greatness is promised thee.	While I was lost in wonder, messages arrived from the king, who hailed me as 'Thane of Cawdor,' the same title the witches used before when they greeted me and hinted at my future, saying, 'Hail, king to be!'

my dearest partner	Whiles I stood rapt in the wonder of it, came missives from the king, who all-hailed me 'Thane of Cawdor;' by which title, before, these weird sisters saluted me, and referred me to the coming on of time, with 'Hail, king that shalt be!' This have I thought good to deliver thee, my dearest partner of greatness, that thou mightst not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being ignorant of what greatness is promised thee. Lay it to thy heart, and farewell.'	my beloved wife

deliver thee, my dearest partner of greatness, that thou mightst not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being ignorant of what greatness is promised thee.	Whiles I stood rapt in the wonder of it, came missives from the king, who all-hailed me 'Thane of Cawdor;' by which title, before, these weird sisters saluted me, and referred me to the coming on of time, with 'Hail, king that shalt be!' This have I thought good to deliver thee, my dearest partner of greatness, that thou mightst not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being ignorant of what greatness is promised thee. Lay it to thy heart, and farewell.'	tell you, my dearest partner, so you don't miss out on celebrating the great things promised to you.

Lay it to thy heart, and farewell.'	This have I thought good to deliver thee, my dearest partner of greatness, that thou mightst not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being ignorant of what greatness is promised thee. Lay it to thy heart, and farewell.' Glamis thou art, and Cawdor; and shalt be What thou art promised: yet do I fear thy nature; It is too full o' the milk of human kindness To catch the nearest way: thou wouldst be great; Art not without ambition, but without The illness should attend it: what thou wouldst highly, That wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false, And yet wouldst wrongly win: thou'ldst have, great Glamis, That which cries 'Thus thou must do, if thou have it; And that which rather thou dost fear to do Than wishest should be undone.'	Remember this and goodbye.

great Glamis	Lay it to thy heart, and farewell.' Glamis thou art, and Cawdor; and shalt be What thou art promised: yet do I fear thy nature; It is too full o' the milk of human kindness To catch the nearest way: thou wouldst be great; Art not without ambition, but without The illness should attend it: what thou wouldst highly, That wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false, And yet wouldst wrongly win: thou'ldst have, great Glamis, That which cries 'Thus thou must do, if thou have it; And that which rather thou dost fear to do Than wishest should be undone.' Hie thee hither, That I may pour my spirits in thine ear; And chastise with the valour of my tongue All that impedes thee from the golden round,	Great Glamis.

cries 'Thus thou must do, if thou have it; And that which rather thou dost fear to do Than wishest should be undone.'	Lay it to thy heart, and farewell.' Glamis thou art, and Cawdor; and shalt be What thou art promised: yet do I fear thy nature; It is too full o' the milk of human kindness To catch the nearest way: thou wouldst be great; Art not without ambition, but without The illness should attend it: what thou wouldst highly, That wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false, And yet wouldst wrongly win: thou'ldst have, great Glamis, That which cries 'Thus thou must do, if thou have it; And that which rather thou dost fear to do Than wishest should be undone.' Hie thee hither, That I may pour my spirits in thine ear; And chastise with the valour of my tongue All that impedes thee from the golden round,	demands, "You must do this to get it," and something you're more afraid to do than you wish you hadn't done.

human kindness	Lay it to thy heart, and farewell.' Glamis thou art, and Cawdor; and shalt be What thou art promised: yet do I fear thy nature; It is too full o' the milk of human kindness To catch the nearest way: thou wouldst be great; Art not without ambition, but without The illness should attend it: what thou wouldst highly, That wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false, And yet wouldst wrongly win: thou'ldst have, great Glamis, That which cries 'Thus thou must do, if thou have it; And that which rather thou dost fear to do Than wishest should be undone.' Hie thee hither, That I may pour my spirits in thine ear; And chastise with the valour of my tongue All that impedes thee from the golden round,	kindness

thine ear	Glamis thou art, and Cawdor; and shalt be What thou art promised: yet do I fear thy nature; It is too full o' the milk of human kindness To catch the nearest way: thou wouldst be great; Art not without ambition, but without The illness should attend it: what thou wouldst highly, That wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false, And yet wouldst wrongly win: thou'ldst have, great Glamis, That which cries 'Thus thou must do, if thou have it; And that which rather thou dost fear to do Than wishest should be undone.' Hie thee hither, That I may pour my spirits in thine ear; And chastise with the valour of my tongue All that impedes thee from the golden round,	your ear

chastise with the valour of my tongue All that impedes thee from the golden round,	Glamis thou art, and Cawdor; and shalt be What thou art promised: yet do I fear thy nature; It is too full o' the milk of human kindness To catch the nearest way: thou wouldst be great; Art not without ambition, but without The illness should attend it: what thou wouldst highly, That wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false, And yet wouldst wrongly win: thou'ldst have, great Glamis, That which cries 'Thus thou must do, if thou have it; And that which rather thou dost fear to do Than wishest should be undone.' Hie thee hither, That I may pour my spirits in thine ear; And chastise with the valour of my tongue All that impedes thee from the golden round,	scold away with brave words everything that stops you from becoming king.

metaphysical aid	Which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem To have thee crown'd withal. What is your tidings?	supernatural help

, were't	Thou'rt mad to say it: Is not thy master with him? who, were't so, Would have inform'd for preparation.	if that were so,

have inform'd for preparation.	Thou'rt mad to say it: Is not thy master with him? who, were't so, Would have inform'd for preparation.	would have let us know so we could prepare.

more Than would make up his message.	So please you, it is true: our thane is coming: One of my fellows had the speed of him, Who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more Than would make up his message.	More than enough breath to deliver his message.

entrance of Duncan Under my battlements.	Give him tending; He brings great news. The raven himself is hoarse That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan Under my battlements. Come, you spirits That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here, And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full Of direst cruelty!	Duncan's arrival at my castle.

direst cruelty	The raven himself is hoarse That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan Under my battlements. Come, you spirits That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here, And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full Of direst cruelty! make thick my blood; Stop up the access and passage to remorse, That no compunctious visitings of nature Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between The effect and it!	horrible cruelty

spirits That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here, And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full Of direst cruelty!	The raven himself is hoarse That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan Under my battlements. Come, you spirits That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here, And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full Of direst cruelty! make thick my blood; Stop up the access and passage to remorse, That no compunctious visitings of nature Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between The effect and it!	You spirits who encourage murderous thoughts, take away my femininity and fill me completely, from head to toe, with the most brutal cruelty!

mortal thoughts	The raven himself is hoarse That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan Under my battlements. Come, you spirits That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here, And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full Of direst cruelty! make thick my blood; Stop up the access and passage to remorse, That no compunctious visitings of nature Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between The effect and it!	thoughts of murder

visitings of nature Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between The effect and it!	Come, you spirits That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here, And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full Of direst cruelty! make thick my blood; Stop up the access and passage to remorse, That no compunctious visitings of nature Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between The effect and it! Come to my woman's breasts, And take my milk for gall, you murdering ministers, Wherever in your sightless substances You wait on nature's mischief!	natural feelings weaken my cruel plan or stop it from happening!

no compunctious visitings	Come, you spirits That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here, And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full Of direst cruelty! make thick my blood; Stop up the access and passage to remorse, That no compunctious visitings of nature Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between The effect and it! Come to my woman's breasts, And take my milk for gall, you murdering ministers, Wherever in your sightless substances You wait on nature's mischief!	no feelings of guilt or regret

your sightless substances	make thick my blood; Stop up the access and passage to remorse, That no compunctious visitings of nature Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between The effect and it! Come to my woman's breasts, And take my milk for gall, you murdering ministers, Wherever in your sightless substances You wait on nature's mischief! Come, thick night, And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell, That my keen knife see not the wound it makes, Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark, To cry 'Hold, hold!'	your invisible forms

my woman's breasts	make thick my blood; Stop up the access and passage to remorse, That no compunctious visitings of nature Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between The effect and it! Come to my woman's breasts, And take my milk for gall, you murdering ministers, Wherever in your sightless substances You wait on nature's mischief! Come, thick night, And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell, That my keen knife see not the wound it makes, Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark, To cry 'Hold, hold!'	my breasts

wait on nature's mischief!	make thick my blood; Stop up the access and passage to remorse, That no compunctious visitings of nature Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between The effect and it! Come to my woman's breasts, And take my milk for gall, you murdering ministers, Wherever in your sightless substances You wait on nature's mischief! Come, thick night, And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell, That my keen knife see not the wound it makes, Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark, To cry 'Hold, hold!'	assist nature in its evil deeds!

nature's mischief	make thick my blood; Stop up the access and passage to remorse, That no compunctious visitings of nature Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between The effect and it! Come to my woman's breasts, And take my milk for gall, you murdering ministers, Wherever in your sightless substances You wait on nature's mischief! Come, thick night, And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell, That my keen knife see not the wound it makes, Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark, To cry 'Hold, hold!'	evil deeds

the dunnest smoke	Come to my woman's breasts, And take my milk for gall, you murdering ministers, Wherever in your sightless substances You wait on nature's mischief! Come, thick night, And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell, That my keen knife see not the wound it makes, Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark, To cry 'Hold, hold!'	the darkest smoke

pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell, That my keen knife see not the wound it makes, Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark, To cry 'Hold, hold!'	Come to my woman's breasts, And take my milk for gall, you murdering ministers, Wherever in your sightless substances You wait on nature's mischief! Come, thick night, And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell, That my keen knife see not the wound it makes, Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark, To cry 'Hold, hold!'	Wrap yourself in the thickest smoke of hell, so my sharp knife can't see the wound it makes, and heaven can't peek through the darkness to shout, "Stop, stop!"

worthy Cawdor	Great Glamis! worthy Cawdor! Greater than both, by the all-hail hereafter!	Honorable Cawdor

Greater than both, by the all-hail hereafter!	worthy Cawdor! Greater than both, by the all-hail hereafter! Thy letters have transported me beyond This ignorant present, and I feel now The future in the instant.	You're going to be greater than both of those titles, according to the prophecies!

This ignorant present	Greater than both, by the all-hail hereafter! Thy letters have transported me beyond This ignorant present, and I feel now The future in the instant.	This present moment of ignorance.

To-morrow, as he purposes.	To-morrow, as he purposes.	Tomorrow, as he plans.

is as a book where men May read strange matters.	O, never Shall sun that morrow see! Your face, my thane, is as a book where men May read strange matters. To beguile the time, Look like the time; bear welcome in your eye, Your hand, your tongue: look like the innocent flower, But be the serpent under't.	is like a book where people can read about disturbing things.

look like the innocent flower, But be the serpent under't.	Your face, my thane, is as a book where men May read strange matters. To beguile the time, Look like the time; bear welcome in your eye, Your hand, your tongue: look like the innocent flower, But be the serpent under't. He that's coming Must be provided for: and you shall put This night's great business into my dispatch; Which shall to all our nights and days to come Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.	Look like an innocent flower, but be a snake hiding beneath it.

shall to all our nights and days to come Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.	To beguile the time, Look like the time; bear welcome in your eye, Your hand, your tongue: look like the innocent flower, But be the serpent under't. He that's coming Must be provided for: and you shall put This night's great business into my dispatch; Which shall to all our nights and days to come Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.	will give us absolute power and control forever.

This night's great business	To beguile the time, Look like the time; bear welcome in your eye, Your hand, your tongue: look like the innocent flower, But be the serpent under't. He that's coming Must be provided for: and you shall put This night's great business into my dispatch; Which shall to all our nights and days to come Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.	Tonight's important task.

solely sovereign sway	To beguile the time, Look like the time; bear welcome in your eye, Your hand, your tongue: look like the innocent flower, But be the serpent under't. He that's coming Must be provided for: and you shall put This night's great business into my dispatch; Which shall to all our nights and days to come Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.	absolute power

his loved mansionry	This guest of summer, The temple-haunting martlet, does approve, By his loved mansionry, that the heaven's breath Smells wooingly here: no jutty, frieze, Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird Hath made his pendent bed and procreant cradle: Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed, The air is delicate.	Its beloved home.

his pendent bed and procreant cradle	This guest of summer, The temple-haunting martlet, does approve, By his loved mansionry, that the heaven's breath Smells wooingly here: no jutty, frieze, Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird Hath made his pendent bed and procreant cradle: Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed, The air is delicate.	Its nest hanging down and where it raises its young.

The temple-haunting martlet	This guest of summer, The temple-haunting martlet, does approve, By his loved mansionry, that the heaven's breath Smells wooingly here: no jutty, frieze, Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird Hath made his pendent bed and procreant cradle: Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed, The air is delicate.	The martin bird that nests around temples

coign of vantage, but this bird Hath made his pendent bed and procreant cradle: Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed, The air is delicate.	This guest of summer, The temple-haunting martlet, does approve, By his loved mansionry, that the heaven's breath Smells wooingly here: no jutty, frieze, Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird Hath made his pendent bed and procreant cradle: Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed, The air is delicate.	every good corner is where this bird has made its hanging bed and breeding nest. Where they breed and live most, I've noticed, the air is pleasant.

the heaven's breath	This guest of summer, The temple-haunting martlet, does approve, By his loved mansionry, that the heaven's breath Smells wooingly here: no jutty, frieze, Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird Hath made his pendent bed and procreant cradle: Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed, The air is delicate.	the air

no jutty, frieze	This guest of summer, The temple-haunting martlet, does approve, By his loved mansionry, that the heaven's breath Smells wooingly here: no jutty, frieze, Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird Hath made his pendent bed and procreant cradle: Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed, The air is delicate.	no overhanging ledge, or decorative band

our honour'd hostess	See, see, our honour'd hostess! The love that follows us sometime is our trouble, Which still we thank as love.	Our honored hostess.

God 'ild	The love that follows us sometime is our trouble, Which still we thank as love. Herein I teach you How you shall bid God 'ild us for your pains, And thank us for your trouble.	God reward you.

bid God 'ild us for your pains, And thank us for your trouble.	The love that follows us sometime is our trouble, Which still we thank as love. Herein I teach you How you shall bid God 'ild us for your pains, And thank us for your trouble.	Ask God to reward us for the pain we caused you, and thank us for the trouble we put you through.

those of old, And the late dignities heap'd up to them, We rest your hermits.	All our service In every point twice done and then done double Were poor and single business to contend Against those honours deep and broad wherewith Your majesty loads our house: for those of old, And the late dignities heap'd up to them, We rest your hermits.	Because of the past honors and the recent ones you've given us, we will retire and be your devoted servants.

the late dignities	All our service In every point twice done and then done double Were poor and single business to contend Against those honours deep and broad wherewith Your majesty loads our house: for those of old, And the late dignities heap'd up to them, We rest your hermits.	The recent honors

thane of Cawdor?	Where's the thane of Cawdor? We coursed him at the heels, and had a purpose To be his purveyor: but he rides well; And his great love, sharp as his spur, hath holp him To his home before us.	Where is the Thane of Cawdor?

make their audit at your highness' pleasure, Still to return your own.	Your servants ever Have theirs, themselves and what is theirs, in compt, To make their audit at your highness' pleasure, Still to return your own.	Always ready to give you an account whenever you wish, and to give back what is yours.

your highness' pleasure	Your servants ever Have theirs, themselves and what is theirs, in compt, To make their audit at your highness' pleasure, Still to return your own.	what you want

his surcease success	If it were done when 'tis done, then 'twere well It were done quickly: if the assassination Could trammel up the consequence, and catch With his surcease success; that but this blow Might be the be-all and the end-all here, But here, upon this bank and shoal of time, We'ld jump the life to come. But in these cases We still have judgment here; that we but teach Bloody instructions, which, being taught, return To plague the inventor: this even-handed justice Commends the ingredients of our poison'd chalice To our own lips.	his death would guarantee success

done quickly: if the assassination Could trammel up the consequence, and catch With his surcease success; that but this blow Might be the be-all and the end-all here, But here, upon this bank and shoal of time, We'ld jump the life to come.	If it were done when 'tis done, then 'twere well It were done quickly: if the assassination Could trammel up the consequence, and catch With his surcease success; that but this blow Might be the be-all and the end-all here, But here, upon this bank and shoal of time, We'ld jump the life to come. But in these cases We still have judgment here; that we but teach Bloody instructions, which, being taught, return To plague the inventor: this even-handed justice Commends the ingredients of our poison'd chalice To our own lips.	done quickly. If this murder could tie up all the consequences and guarantee success with his death, so this one act could be everything, the final thing, right here and now, on this earth, we'd risk the afterlife.

our poison'd chalice	If it were done when 'tis done, then 'twere well It were done quickly: if the assassination Could trammel up the consequence, and catch With his surcease success; that but this blow Might be the be-all and the end-all here, But here, upon this bank and shoal of time, We'ld jump the life to come. But in these cases We still have judgment here; that we but teach Bloody instructions, which, being taught, return To plague the inventor: this even-handed justice Commends the ingredients of our poison'd chalice To our own lips. He's here in double trust; First, as I am his kinsman and his subject, Strong both against the deed; then, as his host, Who should against his murderer shut the door, Not bear the knife myself.	our own poisoned cup

instructions, which, being taught, return To plague the inventor: this even-handed justice Commends the ingredients of our poison'd chalice To our own lips.	If it were done when 'tis done, then 'twere well It were done quickly: if the assassination Could trammel up the consequence, and catch With his surcease success; that but this blow Might be the be-all and the end-all here, But here, upon this bank and shoal of time, We'ld jump the life to come. But in these cases We still have judgment here; that we but teach Bloody instructions, which, being taught, return To plague the inventor: this even-handed justice Commends the ingredients of our poison'd chalice To our own lips. He's here in double trust; First, as I am his kinsman and his subject, Strong both against the deed; then, as his host, Who should against his murderer shut the door, Not bear the knife myself.	violent acts, once learned, come back to haunt the person who started them. Fair justice dictates that we end up drinking the poison we prepare for others.

am his kinsman and his subject, Strong both against the deed; then, as his host, Who should against his murderer shut the door, Not bear the knife myself.	But in these cases We still have judgment here; that we but teach Bloody instructions, which, being taught, return To plague the inventor: this even-handed justice Commends the ingredients of our poison'd chalice To our own lips. He's here in double trust; First, as I am his kinsman and his subject, Strong both against the deed; then, as his host, Who should against his murderer shut the door, Not bear the knife myself. Besides, this Duncan Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been So clear in his great office, that his virtues Will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against The deep damnation of his taking-off; And pity, like a naked new-born babe, Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubim, horsed Upon the sightless couriers of the air, Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye, That tears shall drown the wind.	I am his relative and his loyal subject, both of which should prevent me from doing this. Also, I'm his host, and should be protecting him from murderers, not being one myself.

The deep damnation	He's here in double trust; First, as I am his kinsman and his subject, Strong both against the deed; then, as his host, Who should against his murderer shut the door, Not bear the knife myself. Besides, this Duncan Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been So clear in his great office, that his virtues Will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against The deep damnation of his taking-off; And pity, like a naked new-born babe, Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubim, horsed Upon the sightless couriers of the air, Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye, That tears shall drown the wind. I have no spur To prick the sides of my intent, but only Vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself And falls on the other.	The profound damnation

the sightless couriers	He's here in double trust; First, as I am his kinsman and his subject, Strong both against the deed; then, as his host, Who should against his murderer shut the door, Not bear the knife myself. Besides, this Duncan Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been So clear in his great office, that his virtues Will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against The deep damnation of his taking-off; And pity, like a naked new-born babe, Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubim, horsed Upon the sightless couriers of the air, Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye, That tears shall drown the wind. I have no spur To prick the sides of my intent, but only Vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself And falls on the other.	the invisible horses of the air

this Duncan Hath	He's here in double trust; First, as I am his kinsman and his subject, Strong both against the deed; then, as his host, Who should against his murderer shut the door, Not bear the knife myself. Besides, this Duncan Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been So clear in his great office, that his virtues Will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against The deep damnation of his taking-off; And pity, like a naked new-born babe, Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubim, horsed Upon the sightless couriers of the air, Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye, That tears shall drown the wind. I have no spur To prick the sides of my intent, but only Vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself And falls on the other.	Duncan has

blow the horrid deed in every eye, That tears shall drown the wind.	He's here in double trust; First, as I am his kinsman and his subject, Strong both against the deed; then, as his host, Who should against his murderer shut the door, Not bear the knife myself. Besides, this Duncan Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been So clear in his great office, that his virtues Will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against The deep damnation of his taking-off; And pity, like a naked new-born babe, Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubim, horsed Upon the sightless couriers of the air, Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye, That tears shall drown the wind. I have no spur To prick the sides of my intent, but only Vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself And falls on the other.	will make everyone weep so much that their tears will drown out the wind.

the horrid deed	He's here in double trust; First, as I am his kinsman and his subject, Strong both against the deed; then, as his host, Who should against his murderer shut the door, Not bear the knife myself. Besides, this Duncan Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been So clear in his great office, that his virtues Will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against The deep damnation of his taking-off; And pity, like a naked new-born babe, Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubim, horsed Upon the sightless couriers of the air, Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye, That tears shall drown the wind. I have no spur To prick the sides of my intent, but only Vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself And falls on the other.	the horrible act

ambition, which o'erleaps itself And falls on the other.	Besides, this Duncan Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been So clear in his great office, that his virtues Will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against The deep damnation of his taking-off; And pity, like a naked new-born babe, Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubim, horsed Upon the sightless couriers of the air, Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye, That tears shall drown the wind. I have no spur To prick the sides of my intent, but only Vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself And falls on the other.	ambition, which makes people try too hard and fail.

only Vaulting ambition	Besides, this Duncan Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been So clear in his great office, that his virtues Will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against The deep damnation of his taking-off; And pity, like a naked new-born babe, Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubim, horsed Upon the sightless couriers of the air, Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye, That tears shall drown the wind. I have no spur To prick the sides of my intent, but only Vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself And falls on the other.	only overwhelming ambition

almost supp'd	He has almost supp'd: why have you left the chamber?	Almost finished eating supper.

ask'd for me?	Hath he ask'd for me?	Asked for me?

their newest gloss	We will proceed no further in this business: He hath honour'd me of late; and I have bought Golden opinions from all sorts of people, Which would be worn now in their newest gloss, Not cast aside so soon.	their best shine

opinions from all sorts of people, Which would be worn now in their newest gloss, Not cast aside so soon.	We will proceed no further in this business: He hath honour'd me of late; and I have bought Golden opinions from all sorts of people, Which would be worn now in their newest gloss, Not cast aside so soon.	People think highly of me now, and I want to enjoy that reputation, not throw it away so quickly.

Wherein you	Was the hope drunk Wherein you dress'd yourself? hath it slept since?	Where you

look so green and pale At what it did so freely?	hath it slept since? And wakes it now, to look so green and pale At what it did so freely? From this time Such I account thy love.	Look so sick and pale at what it did so willingly?

thine own act	From this time Such I account thy love. Art thou afeard To be the same in thine own act and valour As thou art in desire? Wouldst thou have that Which thou esteem'st the ornament of life, And live a coward in thine own esteem, Letting 'I dare not' wait upon 'I would,' Like the poor cat i' the adage?	your own actions

same in thine own act and valour As thou art in desire?	From this time Such I account thy love. Art thou afeard To be the same in thine own act and valour As thou art in desire? Wouldst thou have that Which thou esteem'st the ornament of life, And live a coward in thine own esteem, Letting 'I dare not' wait upon 'I would,' Like the poor cat i' the adage?	Act with the same courage and strength you feel when you just want something?

thine own esteem	Art thou afeard To be the same in thine own act and valour As thou art in desire? Wouldst thou have that Which thou esteem'st the ornament of life, And live a coward in thine own esteem, Letting 'I dare not' wait upon 'I would,' Like the poor cat i' the adage?	how you see yourself

Letting 'I dare not' wait upon 'I would,' Like the poor cat i' the adage?	Art thou afeard To be the same in thine own act and valour As thou art in desire? Wouldst thou have that Which thou esteem'st the ornament of life, And live a coward in thine own esteem, Letting 'I dare not' wait upon 'I would,' Like the poor cat i' the adage?	Are you going to let "I'm too afraid" always follow "I want to," like the cat in the old saying who wanted fish but didn't want to get its paws wet?

all that may become a man; Who dares do more is none.	Prithee, peace: I dare do all that may become a man; Who dares do more is none.	I dare to do everything a man should do; whoever dares to do more is not a man.

were a man; And, to be more than what you were, you would Be so much more the man.	What beast was't, then, That made you break this enterprise to me? When you durst do it, then you were a man; And, to be more than what you were, you would Be so much more the man. Nor time nor place Did then adhere, and yet you would make both: They have made themselves, and that their fitness now Does unmake you.	You were a man then. To become even greater, you were determined to be an even stronger man.

sworn as you Have done to this.	Nor time nor place Did then adhere, and yet you would make both: They have made themselves, and that their fitness now Does unmake you. I have given suck, and know How tender 'tis to love the babe that milks me: I would, while it was smiling in my face, Have pluck'd my nipple from his boneless gums, And dash'd the brains out, had I so sworn as you Have done to this.	sworn as you have to this.

his boneless gums	Nor time nor place Did then adhere, and yet you would make both: They have made themselves, and that their fitness now Does unmake you. I have given suck, and know How tender 'tis to love the babe that milks me: I would, while it was smiling in my face, Have pluck'd my nipple from his boneless gums, And dash'd the brains out, had I so sworn as you Have done to this.	his soft gums

The unguarded Duncan	But screw your courage to the sticking-place, And we'll not fail. When Duncan is asleep— Whereto the rather shall his day's hard journey Soundly invite him—his two chamberlains Will I with wine and wassail so convince That memory, the warder of the brain, Shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason A limbeck only: when in swinish sleep Their drenched natures lie as in a death, What cannot you and I perform upon The unguarded Duncan? what not put upon His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt Of our great quell?	Duncan, who is unprotected.

Their drenched natures	But screw your courage to the sticking-place, And we'll not fail. When Duncan is asleep— Whereto the rather shall his day's hard journey Soundly invite him—his two chamberlains Will I with wine and wassail so convince That memory, the warder of the brain, Shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason A limbeck only: when in swinish sleep Their drenched natures lie as in a death, What cannot you and I perform upon The unguarded Duncan? what not put upon His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt Of our great quell?	Their drunken bodies

his day's hard journey	But screw your courage to the sticking-place, And we'll not fail. When Duncan is asleep— Whereto the rather shall his day's hard journey Soundly invite him—his two chamberlains Will I with wine and wassail so convince That memory, the warder of the brain, Shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason A limbeck only: when in swinish sleep Their drenched natures lie as in a death, What cannot you and I perform upon The unguarded Duncan? what not put upon His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt Of our great quell?	his tiring day of travel

his two chamberlains	But screw your courage to the sticking-place, And we'll not fail. When Duncan is asleep— Whereto the rather shall his day's hard journey Soundly invite him—his two chamberlains Will I with wine and wassail so convince That memory, the warder of the brain, Shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason A limbeck only: when in swinish sleep Their drenched natures lie as in a death, What cannot you and I perform upon The unguarded Duncan? what not put upon His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt Of our great quell?	his two guards

when in swinish sleep	But screw your courage to the sticking-place, And we'll not fail. When Duncan is asleep— Whereto the rather shall his day's hard journey Soundly invite him—his two chamberlains Will I with wine and wassail so convince That memory, the warder of the brain, Shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason A limbeck only: when in swinish sleep Their drenched natures lie as in a death, What cannot you and I perform upon The unguarded Duncan? what not put upon His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt Of our great quell?	when they're passed out drunk

perform upon The unguarded Duncan?	But screw your courage to the sticking-place, And we'll not fail. When Duncan is asleep— Whereto the rather shall his day's hard journey Soundly invite him—his two chamberlains Will I with wine and wassail so convince That memory, the warder of the brain, Shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason A limbeck only: when in swinish sleep Their drenched natures lie as in a death, What cannot you and I perform upon The unguarded Duncan? what not put upon His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt Of our great quell?	do to the unprotected Duncan?

our great quell	When Duncan is asleep— Whereto the rather shall his day's hard journey Soundly invite him—his two chamberlains Will I with wine and wassail so convince That memory, the warder of the brain, Shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason A limbeck only: when in swinish sleep Their drenched natures lie as in a death, What cannot you and I perform upon The unguarded Duncan? what not put upon His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt Of our great quell?	our great murder

His spongy officers	When Duncan is asleep— Whereto the rather shall his day's hard journey Soundly invite him—his two chamberlains Will I with wine and wassail so convince That memory, the warder of the brain, Shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason A limbeck only: when in swinish sleep Their drenched natures lie as in a death, What cannot you and I perform upon The unguarded Duncan? what not put upon His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt Of our great quell?	His drunk and easily manipulated officers

put upon His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt Of our great quell?	When Duncan is asleep— Whereto the rather shall his day's hard journey Soundly invite him—his two chamberlains Will I with wine and wassail so convince That memory, the warder of the brain, Shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason A limbeck only: when in swinish sleep Their drenched natures lie as in a death, What cannot you and I perform upon The unguarded Duncan? what not put upon His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt Of our great quell?	frame his drunk guards who will take the blame for our deadly work?

thy undaunted mettle	Bring forth men-children only; For thy undaunted mettle should compose Nothing but males. Will it not be received, When we have mark'd with blood those sleepy two Of his own chamber and used their very daggers, That they have done't?	your fearless spirit

compose Nothing but males.	Bring forth men-children only; For thy undaunted mettle should compose Nothing but males. Will it not be received, When we have mark'd with blood those sleepy two Of his own chamber and used their very daggers, That they have done't?	produce only sons.

blood those sleepy two Of his own chamber and used their very daggers, That they have done't?	Bring forth men-children only; For thy undaunted mettle should compose Nothing but males. Will it not be received, When we have mark'd with blood those sleepy two Of his own chamber and used their very daggers, That they have done't?	Framed those two sleeping guards in his room by using their daggers and covering them with blood to make it look like they did it?

their very daggers	Bring forth men-children only; For thy undaunted mettle should compose Nothing but males. Will it not be received, When we have mark'd with blood those sleepy two Of his own chamber and used their very daggers, That they have done't?	their own daggers

dares receive it other, As we shall make our griefs and clamour roar Upon his death?	Who dares receive it other, As we shall make our griefs and clamour roar Upon his death?	Who else would dare accept it, when we will make our grief and outrage explode upon his death?

Each corporal agent	I am settled, and bend up Each corporal agent to this terrible feat. Away, and mock the time with fairest show: False face must hide what the false heart doth know.	Every bodily power.

bend up Each corporal agent to this terrible feat.	I am settled, and bend up Each corporal agent to this terrible feat. Away, and mock the time with fairest show: False face must hide what the false heart doth know.	Focus all my physical energy on this horrible act.

time with fairest show: False face must hide what the false heart doth know.	I am settled, and bend up Each corporal agent to this terrible feat. Away, and mock the time with fairest show: False face must hide what the false heart doth know.	Act normal and deceive everyone: hide your evil intentions with a friendly face.

husbandry in heaven; Their candles are all out.	Hold, take my sword. There's husbandry in heaven; Their candles are all out. Take thee that too.	It's thrifty in the heavens; the stars are not shining.

lies like lead upon me, And yet I would not sleep: merciful powers, Restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature Gives way to in repose!	Take thee that too. A heavy summons lies like lead upon me, And yet I would not sleep: merciful powers, Restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature Gives way to in repose!	weighs me down heavily, but I don't want to sleep. Kind gods, stop the evil thoughts that come to me when I rest!

the cursed thoughts	Take thee that too. A heavy summons lies like lead upon me, And yet I would not sleep: merciful powers, Restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature Gives way to in repose!	Evil thoughts.

A heavy summons	Take thee that too. A heavy summons lies like lead upon me, And yet I would not sleep: merciful powers, Restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature Gives way to in repose!	A pressing obligation.

merciful powers	Take thee that too. A heavy summons lies like lead upon me, And yet I would not sleep: merciful powers, Restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature Gives way to in repose!	Gods, be merciful.

been in unusual pleasure, and Sent forth great largess to your offices.	What, sir, not yet at rest? The king's a-bed: He hath been in unusual pleasure, and Sent forth great largess to your offices. This diamond he greets your wife withal, By the name of most kind hostess; and shut up In measureless content.	been in a very good mood and sent generous gifts to your staff.

great largess	What, sir, not yet at rest? The king's a-bed: He hath been in unusual pleasure, and Sent forth great largess to your offices. This diamond he greets your wife withal, By the name of most kind hostess; and shut up In measureless content.	generous gifts

measureless content	The king's a-bed: He hath been in unusual pleasure, and Sent forth great largess to your offices. This diamond he greets your wife withal, By the name of most kind hostess; and shut up In measureless content.	Complete satisfaction.

most kind hostess	The king's a-bed: He hath been in unusual pleasure, and Sent forth great largess to your offices. This diamond he greets your wife withal, By the name of most kind hostess; and shut up In measureless content.	very kind hostess

shut up In measureless content.	The king's a-bed: He hath been in unusual pleasure, and Sent forth great largess to your offices. This diamond he greets your wife withal, By the name of most kind hostess; and shut up In measureless content.	Filled with immense satisfaction.

became the servant to defect; Which else should free have wrought.	Being unprepared, Our will became the servant to defect; Which else should free have wrought.	We became slaves to our flaws, which we could have overcome if we were prepared.

show'd some truth.	All's well. I dreamt last night of the three weird sisters: To you they have show'd some truth.	showed some truth.

words upon that business, If you would grant the time.	I think not of them: Yet, when we can entreat an hour to serve, We would spend it in some words upon that business, If you would grant the time.	Talk about it, if you have time.

your kind'st leisure	At your kind'st leisure.	At your convenience.

cleave to my consent, when 'tis, It shall make honour for you.	If you shall cleave to my consent, when 'tis, It shall make honour for you.	If you agree with me when the time comes, it will bring you honor.

lose none In seeking to augment it, but still keep My bosom franchised and allegiance clear, I shall be counsell'd.	So I lose none In seeking to augment it, but still keep My bosom franchised and allegiance clear, I shall be counsell'd.	I won't lose anything by trying to improve it, and as long as I remain free and loyal, I will take advice.

Good repose	Good repose the while!	Rest well.

sensible To feeling as to sight?	I have thee not, and yet I see thee still. Art thou not, fatal vision, sensible To feeling as to sight? or art thou but A dagger of the mind, a false creation, Proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain?	Can I feel you as well as see you?

dagger of the mind, a false creation, Proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain?	Art thou not, fatal vision, sensible To feeling as to sight? or art thou but A dagger of the mind, a false creation, Proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain? I see thee yet, in form as palpable As this which now I draw.	A dagger created by my mind, a hallucination, coming from my fevered brain?

the heat-oppressed brain	Art thou not, fatal vision, sensible To feeling as to sight? or art thou but A dagger of the mind, a false creation, Proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain? I see thee yet, in form as palpable As this which now I draw.	A brain feverish and stressed.

palpable As this which now I draw.	or art thou but A dagger of the mind, a false creation, Proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain? I see thee yet, in form as palpable As this which now I draw. Thou marshall'st me the way that I was going; And such an instrument I was to use.	as real as the sword I'm about to draw.

gouts of blood, Which was not so before.	Thou marshall'st me the way that I was going; And such an instrument I was to use. Mine eyes are made the fools o' the other senses, Or else worth all the rest; I see thee still, And on thy blade and dudgeon gouts of blood, Which was not so before. There's no such thing: It is the bloody business which informs Thus to mine eyes.	drops of blood, that weren't there before.

dudgeon gouts	Thou marshall'st me the way that I was going; And such an instrument I was to use. Mine eyes are made the fools o' the other senses, Or else worth all the rest; I see thee still, And on thy blade and dudgeon gouts of blood, Which was not so before. There's no such thing: It is the bloody business which informs Thus to mine eyes.	hilt drops

business which informs Thus to mine eyes.	Mine eyes are made the fools o' the other senses, Or else worth all the rest; I see thee still, And on thy blade and dudgeon gouts of blood, Which was not so before. There's no such thing: It is the bloody business which informs Thus to mine eyes. Now o'er the one halfworld Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse The curtain'd sleep; witchcraft celebrates Pale Hecate's offerings, and wither'd murder, Alarum'd by his sentinel, the wolf, Whose howl's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace.	It's the bloody deed that makes me see this.

wolf, Whose howl's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace.	There's no such thing: It is the bloody business which informs Thus to mine eyes. Now o'er the one halfworld Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse The curtain'd sleep; witchcraft celebrates Pale Hecate's offerings, and wither'd murder, Alarum'd by his sentinel, the wolf, Whose howl's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace. With Tarquin's ravishing strides, towards his design Moves like a ghost.	the wolf, whose howl is his signal, moves with quiet steps.

Whose howl's his watch	There's no such thing: It is the bloody business which informs Thus to mine eyes. Now o'er the one halfworld Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse The curtain'd sleep; witchcraft celebrates Pale Hecate's offerings, and wither'd murder, Alarum'd by his sentinel, the wolf, Whose howl's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace. With Tarquin's ravishing strides, towards his design Moves like a ghost.	Whose howl is his signal

the one halfworld Nature	There's no such thing: It is the bloody business which informs Thus to mine eyes. Now o'er the one halfworld Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse The curtain'd sleep; witchcraft celebrates Pale Hecate's offerings, and wither'd murder, Alarum'd by his sentinel, the wolf, Whose howl's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace. With Tarquin's ravishing strides, towards his design Moves like a ghost.	half the world

The curtain'd sleep	There's no such thing: It is the bloody business which informs Thus to mine eyes. Now o'er the one halfworld Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse The curtain'd sleep; witchcraft celebrates Pale Hecate's offerings, and wither'd murder, Alarum'd by his sentinel, the wolf, Whose howl's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace. With Tarquin's ravishing strides, towards his design Moves like a ghost.	Sleep behind drawn curtains.

his stealthy pace	There's no such thing: It is the bloody business which informs Thus to mine eyes. Now o'er the one halfworld Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse The curtain'd sleep; witchcraft celebrates Pale Hecate's offerings, and wither'd murder, Alarum'd by his sentinel, the wolf, Whose howl's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace. With Tarquin's ravishing strides, towards his design Moves like a ghost.	his quiet, sneaky steps

Pale Hecate's offerings	There's no such thing: It is the bloody business which informs Thus to mine eyes. Now o'er the one halfworld Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse The curtain'd sleep; witchcraft celebrates Pale Hecate's offerings, and wither'd murder, Alarum'd by his sentinel, the wolf, Whose howl's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace. With Tarquin's ravishing strides, towards his design Moves like a ghost.	Offerings to pale Hecate

Tarquin's ravishing strides	Now o'er the one halfworld Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse The curtain'd sleep; witchcraft celebrates Pale Hecate's offerings, and wither'd murder, Alarum'd by his sentinel, the wolf, Whose howl's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace. With Tarquin's ravishing strides, towards his design Moves like a ghost. Thou sure and firm-set earth, Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear Thy very stones prate of my whereabout, And take the present horror from the time, Which now suits with it.	Tarquin's stealthy steps of rape

take the present horror from the time, Which now suits with it.	With Tarquin's ravishing strides, towards his design Moves like a ghost. Thou sure and firm-set earth, Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear Thy very stones prate of my whereabout, And take the present horror from the time, Which now suits with it. Whiles I threat, he lives: Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.	steal the current horror from this moment, which is perfect for it.

Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.	Thou sure and firm-set earth, Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear Thy very stones prate of my whereabout, And take the present horror from the time, Which now suits with it. Whiles I threat, he lives: Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.	Talking cools down the passion to act.

summons thee to heaven or to hell.	I go, and it is done; the bell invites me. Hear it not, Duncan; for it is a knell That summons thee to heaven or to hell.	Calls you to heaven or hell.

That which hath made them drunk hath made me bold; What hath quench'd them hath given me fire.	That which hath made them drunk hath made me bold; What hath quench'd them hath given me fire. Hark!	What made them drunk has made me bold; what put them out has ignited me.

bellman, Which gives the stern'st good-night.	Peace! It was the owl that shriek'd, the fatal bellman, Which gives the stern'st good-night. He is about it: The doors are open; and the surfeited grooms Do mock their charge with snores: I have drugg'd their possets, That death and nature do contend about them, Whether they live or die.	bellman, who announces the final good night.

the fatal bellman	Peace! It was the owl that shriek'd, the fatal bellman, Which gives the stern'st good-night. He is about it: The doors are open; and the surfeited grooms Do mock their charge with snores: I have drugg'd their possets, That death and nature do contend about them, Whether they live or die.	the messenger of death

the surfeited grooms	It was the owl that shriek'd, the fatal bellman, Which gives the stern'st good-night. He is about it: The doors are open; and the surfeited grooms Do mock their charge with snores: I have drugg'd their possets, That death and nature do contend about them, Whether they live or die.	the overfed servants

mock their charge with snores: I have drugg'd their possets, That death and nature do contend about them, Whether they live or die.	It was the owl that shriek'd, the fatal bellman, Which gives the stern'st good-night. He is about it: The doors are open; and the surfeited grooms Do mock their charge with snores: I have drugg'd their possets, That death and nature do contend about them, Whether they live or die.	Their snoring makes fun of the people they're supposed to be guarding. I've drugged their drinks, so they're in such a deep sleep that it's a struggle for them to stay alive.

not the deed	Alack, I am afraid they have awaked, And 'tis not done. The attempt and not the deed Confounds us. Hark!	Not finishing the act

slept, I had done't.	I laid their daggers ready; He could not miss 'em. Had he not resembled My father as he slept, I had done't. My husband!	slept, I would have done it.

the owl scream	I heard the owl scream and the crickets cry. Did not you speak?	the owl screech

A foolish thought	A foolish thought, to say a sorry sight.	A foolish thought.

laugh in's sleep, and one cried 'Murder!'	There's one did laugh in's sleep, and one cried 'Murder!' That they did wake each other: I stood and heard them: But they did say their prayers, and address'd them Again to sleep.	laugh in his sleep, and someone cried 'Murder!'

address'd them	There's one did laugh in's sleep, and one cried 'Murder!' That they did wake each other: I stood and heard them: But they did say their prayers, and address'd them Again to sleep.	went back

these hangman's hands	One cried 'God bless us!' and 'Amen' the other; As they had seen me with these hangman's hands. Listening their fear, I could not say 'Amen,' When they did say 'God bless us!'	These hands that have killed.

seen me with these hangman's hands.	One cried 'God bless us!' and 'Amen' the other; As they had seen me with these hangman's hands. Listening their fear, I could not say 'Amen,' When they did say 'God bless us!'	saw me with these bloodstained hands.

say 'Amen,' When they did say 'God bless us!'	and 'Amen' the other; As they had seen me with these hangman's hands. Listening their fear, I could not say 'Amen,' When they did say 'God bless us!'	Say "Amen" when they said "God bless us!"

great nature's second course	Methought I heard a voice cry 'Sleep no more! Macbeth does murder sleep', the innocent sleep, Sleep that knits up the ravell'd sleeve of care, The death of each day's life, sore labour's bath, Balm of hurt minds, great nature's second course, Chief nourisher in life's feast,—	nature's main replenishment

sore labour's bath	Methought I heard a voice cry 'Sleep no more! Macbeth does murder sleep', the innocent sleep, Sleep that knits up the ravell'd sleeve of care, The death of each day's life, sore labour's bath, Balm of hurt minds, great nature's second course, Chief nourisher in life's feast,—	Sleep is like a bath for tired workers.

nourisher in life's feast,—	Methought I heard a voice cry 'Sleep no more! Macbeth does murder sleep', the innocent sleep, Sleep that knits up the ravell'd sleeve of care, The death of each day's life, sore labour's bath, Balm of hurt minds, great nature's second course, Chief nourisher in life's feast,—	feeds us during life's banquet.

Chief nourisher	Methought I heard a voice cry 'Sleep no more! Macbeth does murder sleep', the innocent sleep, Sleep that knits up the ravell'd sleeve of care, The death of each day's life, sore labour's bath, Balm of hurt minds, great nature's second course, Chief nourisher in life's feast,—	Main source of nourishment.

life's feast	Methought I heard a voice cry 'Sleep no more! Macbeth does murder sleep', the innocent sleep, Sleep that knits up the ravell'd sleeve of care, The death of each day's life, sore labour's bath, Balm of hurt minds, great nature's second course, Chief nourisher in life's feast,—	the most important thing that keeps us alive.

the ravell'd sleeve	Methought I heard a voice cry 'Sleep no more! Macbeth does murder sleep', the innocent sleep, Sleep that knits up the ravell'd sleeve of care, The death of each day's life, sore labour's bath, Balm of hurt minds, great nature's second course, Chief nourisher in life's feast,—	the tangled mess

each day's life	Methought I heard a voice cry 'Sleep no more! Macbeth does murder sleep', the innocent sleep, Sleep that knits up the ravell'd sleeve of care, The death of each day's life, sore labour's bath, Balm of hurt minds, great nature's second course, Chief nourisher in life's feast,—	each day's life

hath murder'd sleep, and therefore Cawdor Shall sleep no more; Macbeth shall sleep no more.'	Still it cried 'Sleep no more!' to all the house: 'Glamis hath murder'd sleep, and therefore Cawdor Shall sleep no more; Macbeth shall sleep no more.'	has murdered sleep, and therefore Cawdor will sleep no more; Macbeth will sleep no more.

murder'd sleep	Still it cried 'Sleep no more!' to all the house: 'Glamis hath murder'd sleep, and therefore Cawdor Shall sleep no more; Macbeth shall sleep no more.'	killed sleep

unbend your noble strength, to think So brainsickly of things.	Who was it that thus cried? Why, worthy thane, You do unbend your noble strength, to think So brainsickly of things. Go get some water, And wash this filthy witness from your hand.	Weaken your strong mind by dwelling on such crazy thoughts.

Go get some water, And wash this filthy witness from your hand.	Why, worthy thane, You do unbend your noble strength, to think So brainsickly of things. Go get some water, And wash this filthy witness from your hand. Why did you bring these daggers from the place?	Go get some water and wash this disgusting evidence off your hands.

this filthy witness	Why, worthy thane, You do unbend your noble strength, to think So brainsickly of things. Go get some water, And wash this filthy witness from your hand. Why did you bring these daggers from the place?	This bloody evidence

bring these daggers from the place?	Go get some water, And wash this filthy witness from your hand. Why did you bring these daggers from the place? They must lie there: go carry them; and smear The sleepy grooms with blood.	Why did you bring the daggers from there?

The sleepy grooms	Why did you bring these daggers from the place? They must lie there: go carry them; and smear The sleepy grooms with blood.	Those sleeping guards

grooms with blood.	Why did you bring these daggers from the place? They must lie there: go carry them; and smear The sleepy grooms with blood.	Cover the sleeping guards with blood.

Infirm of purpose!	Infirm of purpose! Give me the daggers: the sleeping and the dead Are	Weak-willed!

eye of childhood That fears a painted devil.	Give me the daggers: the sleeping and the dead Are but as pictures: 'tis the eye of childhood That fears a painted devil. If he do bleed, I'll gild the faces of the grooms withal; For it must seem their guilt.	It's only a child who's scared of a painted devil.

faces of the grooms withal; For it must seem their guilt.	but as pictures: 'tis the eye of childhood That fears a painted devil. If he do bleed, I'll gild the faces of the grooms withal; For it must seem their guilt.	I'll make the grooms' faces golden with blood, to make it look like they're the guilty ones.

is't with me, when every noise appals me?	Whence is that knocking? How is't with me, when every noise appals me? What hands are here?	What's wrong with me, that every sound terrifies me?

How is't	Whence is that knocking? How is't with me, when every noise appals me? What hands are here?	How are things?

all great Neptune's ocean	they pluck out mine eyes. Will all great Neptune's ocean wash this blood Clean from my hand? No, this my hand will rather The multitudinous seas in incarnadine, Making the green one red.	all the water in the ocean

The multitudinous seas	Will all great Neptune's ocean wash this blood Clean from my hand? No, this my hand will rather The multitudinous seas in incarnadine, Making the green one red.	The vast oceans

seas in incarnadine, Making the green one red.	Will all great Neptune's ocean wash this blood Clean from my hand? No, this my hand will rather The multitudinous seas in incarnadine, Making the green one red.	seas red, turning the green ocean red.

knocking At the south entry: retire we to our chamber; A little water clears us of this deed: How easy is it, then!	My hands are of your colour; but I shame To wear a heart so white. I hear a knocking At the south entry: retire we to our chamber; A little water clears us of this deed: How easy is it, then! Your constancy Hath left you unattended.	Someone's knocking at the south entrance. Let's go to our room. A little water will wash away what we've done. It's that easy!

constancy Hath left you unattended.	I hear a knocking At the south entry: retire we to our chamber; A little water clears us of this deed: How easy is it, then! Your constancy Hath left you unattended. Hark!	Your firm spirit has made you act alone.

Get on your nightgown, lest occasion call us, And show us to be watchers.	more knocking. Get on your nightgown, lest occasion call us, And show us to be watchers. Be not lost So poorly in your thoughts.	Put on your nightgown, in case we're needed, and let's look like we're on guard.

lost So poorly in your thoughts.	Get on your nightgown, lest occasion call us, And show us to be watchers. Be not lost So poorly in your thoughts.	Don't get so lost in your thoughts.

twere best not know myself.	To know my deed, 'twere best not know myself. Wake Duncan with thy knocking!	It's better I don't know who I am.

Wake Duncan with thy knocking!	To know my deed, 'twere best not know myself. Wake Duncan with thy knocking! I would thou couldst!	Wake Duncan with your knocking!

have old turning the key.	Here's a knocking indeed! If a man were porter of hell-gate, he should have old turning the key. Knock, knock, knock!	would have a lot of key-turning to do.

name of Beelzebub?	Knock, knock, knock! Who's there, i' the name of Beelzebub? Here's a farmer, that hanged himself on the expectation of plenty: come in time; have napkins enow about you; here you'll sweat for't.	By the name of the Devil?

enow about you; here you'll sweat for't.	Who's there, i' the name of Beelzebub? Here's a farmer, that hanged himself on the expectation of plenty: come in time; have napkins enow about you; here you'll sweat for't. Knock, knock!	Enough of them with you; you'll sweat for it here.

's there, in the other devil's name?	Knock, knock! Who's there, in the other devil's name? Faith, here's an equivocator, that could swear in both the scales against either scale; who committed treason enough for God's sake, yet could not equivocate to heaven: O, come in, equivocator.	Who's there, in the name of another devil?

the other devil's name	Knock, knock! Who's there, in the other devil's name? Faith, here's an equivocator, that could swear in both the scales against either scale; who committed treason enough for God's sake, yet could not equivocate to heaven: O, come in, equivocator.	What other devil's name is that?

God's sake	Who's there, in the other devil's name? Faith, here's an equivocator, that could swear in both the scales against either scale; who committed treason enough for God's sake, yet could not equivocate to heaven: O, come in, equivocator. Knock, knock, knock!	For God's sake

swear in both the scales against either scale; who committed treason enough for God's sake, yet could not equivocate to heaven: O, come in, equivocator.	Who's there, in the other devil's name? Faith, here's an equivocator, that could swear in both the scales against either scale; who committed treason enough for God's sake, yet could not equivocate to heaven: O, come in, equivocator. Knock, knock, knock!	lie to support either side of an argument; someone who betrayed people believing he was doing God's will, but couldn't trick his way into heaven. Come in, liar.

an English tailor	Who's there? Faith, here's an English tailor come hither, for stealing out of a French hose: come in, tailor; here you may roast your goose. Knock, knock; never at quiet!	An English tailor

come hither, for stealing out of a French hose: come in, tailor; here you may roast your goose.	Who's there? Faith, here's an English tailor come hither, for stealing out of a French hose: come in, tailor; here you may roast your goose. Knock, knock; never at quiet!	Come here, you're accused of stealing fabric from French trousers. Come in, tailor, and you can iron your clothes here.

go the primrose way to the everlasting bonfire.	But this place is too cold for hell. I'll devil-porter it no further: I had thought to have let in some of all professions that go the primrose way to the everlasting bonfire. Anon, anon!	are headed down the easy path to eternal damnation.

the everlasting bonfire	But this place is too cold for hell. I'll devil-porter it no further: I had thought to have let in some of all professions that go the primrose way to the everlasting bonfire. Anon, anon!	Hell.

the primrose way	But this place is too cold for hell. I'll devil-porter it no further: I had thought to have let in some of all professions that go the primrose way to the everlasting bonfire. Anon, anon!	the easy path

Anon, anon!	I'll devil-porter it no further: I had thought to have let in some of all professions that go the primrose way to the everlasting bonfire. Anon, anon! I pray you, remember the porter.	Coming, coming!

a great provoker	'Faith sir, we were carousing till the second cock: and drink, sir, is a great provoker of three things.	a big instigator

provoker of three things.	'Faith sir, we were carousing till the second cock: and drink, sir, is a great provoker of three things.	...it makes you want to do three things.

stand to; in conclusion, equivocates him in a sleep, and, giving him the lie, leaves him.	Marry, sir, nose-painting, sleep, and urine. Lechery, sir, it provokes, and unprovokes; it provokes the desire, but it takes away the performance: therefore, much drink may be said to be an equivocator with lechery: it makes him, and it mars him; it sets him on, and it takes him off; it persuades him, and disheartens him; makes him stand to, and not stand to; in conclusion, equivocates him in a sleep, and, giving him the lie, leaves him.	Keeps him going; but ultimately deceives him into sleep, then betrays and abandons him.

being too strong for him, though he took up my legs sometime, yet I made a shift to cast him.	That it did, sir, i' the very throat on me: but I requited him for his lie; and, I think, being too strong for him, though he took up my legs sometime, yet I made a shift to cast him.	I was stronger than him, and even though he tripped me up for a bit, I managed to throw him off.

morrow, noble sir.	Good morrow, noble sir.	Good morning, noble sir.

Good morrow	Good morrow, noble sir.	Good morning.

morrow, both.	Good morrow, both.	Morning, both.

Good morrow	Good morrow, both.	Good morning.

, worthy thane	Is the king stirring, worthy thane?	, worthy thane

call timely on him: I have almost slipp'd the hour.	He did command me to call timely on him: I have almost slipp'd the hour.	Visit him promptly: I'm almost late.

trouble to you; But yet 'tis one.	I know this is a joyful trouble to you; But yet 'tis one.	It's a happy burden, but a burden nonetheless.

a joyful trouble	I know this is a joyful trouble to you; But yet 'tis one.	a happy burden

make so bold to call, For 'tis my limited service.	I'll make so bold to call, For 'tis my limited service.	I'll take the liberty of calling, as it's my duty.

strange screams	The night has been unruly: where we lay, Our chimneys were blown down; and, as they say, Lamentings heard i' the air; strange screams of death, And prophesying with accents terrible Of dire combustion and confused events New hatch'd to the woeful time: the obscure bird Clamour'd the livelong night: some say, the earth Was feverous and did shake.	Strange screams.

the obscure bird	The night has been unruly: where we lay, Our chimneys were blown down; and, as they say, Lamentings heard i' the air; strange screams of death, And prophesying with accents terrible Of dire combustion and confused events New hatch'd to the woeful time: the obscure bird Clamour'd the livelong night: some say, the earth Was feverous and did shake.	The owl.

the woeful time	The night has been unruly: where we lay, Our chimneys were blown down; and, as they say, Lamentings heard i' the air; strange screams of death, And prophesying with accents terrible Of dire combustion and confused events New hatch'd to the woeful time: the obscure bird Clamour'd the livelong night: some say, the earth Was feverous and did shake.	the sorrowful time

dire combustion	The night has been unruly: where we lay, Our chimneys were blown down; and, as they say, Lamentings heard i' the air; strange screams of death, And prophesying with accents terrible Of dire combustion and confused events New hatch'd to the woeful time: the obscure bird Clamour'd the livelong night: some say, the earth Was feverous and did shake.	terrible fires

confused events	The night has been unruly: where we lay, Our chimneys were blown down; and, as they say, Lamentings heard i' the air; strange screams of death, And prophesying with accents terrible Of dire combustion and confused events New hatch'd to the woeful time: the obscure bird Clamour'd the livelong night: some say, the earth Was feverous and did shake.	Chaotic happenings

bird Clamour'd the livelong night: some say, the earth Was feverous and did shake.	The night has been unruly: where we lay, Our chimneys were blown down; and, as they say, Lamentings heard i' the air; strange screams of death, And prophesying with accents terrible Of dire combustion and confused events New hatch'd to the woeful time: the obscure bird Clamour'd the livelong night: some say, the earth Was feverous and did shake.	The owl shrieked all night long; some say the earth was trembling with fever.

My young remembrance	My young remembrance cannot parallel A fellow to it.	As far as I can remember

Most sacrilegious murder	Confusion now hath made his masterpiece! Most sacrilegious murder hath broke ope The Lord's anointed temple, and stole thence	The most holy murder

The Lord's anointed temple	Most sacrilegious murder hath broke ope The Lord's anointed temple, and stole thence The life o' the building!	The king's body

you his majesty?	Mean you his majesty?	Are you talking about the king?

a new Gorgon	Approach the chamber, and destroy your sight With a new Gorgon: do not bid me speak; See, and then speak yourselves. Awake, awake!	Something terrifying to behold.

destroy your sight With a new Gorgon: do not bid me speak; See, and then speak yourselves.	Approach the chamber, and destroy your sight With a new Gorgon: do not bid me speak; See, and then speak yourselves. Awake, awake!	You'll be horrified by what you see, like looking at a Gorgon. Don't ask me to explain; see it for yourselves and then talk about it.

the alarum-bell	Awake, awake! Ring the alarum-bell. Murder and treason!	The alarm bell

this downy sleep	awake! Shake off this downy sleep, death's counterfeit, And look on death itself! up, up, and see The great doom's image!	this heavy sleep

The great doom's image	Shake off this downy sleep, death's counterfeit, And look on death itself! up, up, and see The great doom's image! Malcolm!	Look upon the picture of the day of judgment!

As from your graves rise up, and walk like sprites, To countenance this horror!	Banquo! As from your graves rise up, and walk like sprites, To countenance this horror! Ring the bell.	Rise from your graves like ghosts and witness this horror!

calls to parley The sleepers of the house?	What's the business, That such a hideous trumpet calls to parley The sleepers of the house? speak, speak!	awakes everyone in the house?

such a hideous trumpet	What's the business, That such a hideous trumpet calls to parley The sleepers of the house? speak, speak!	such a terrible trumpet

hear what I can speak: The repetition, in a woman's ear, Would murder as it fell.	O gentle lady, 'Tis not for you to hear what I can speak: The repetition, in a woman's ear, Would murder as it fell. O Banquo, Banquo, Our royal master 's murder'd!	hear what I have to say: Repeating it to a woman would be too shocking and painful.

a woman's ear	O gentle lady, 'Tis not for you to hear what I can speak: The repetition, in a woman's ear, Would murder as it fell. O Banquo, Banquo, Our royal master 's murder'd!	a woman

O Banquo	O gentle lady, 'Tis not for you to hear what I can speak: The repetition, in a woman's ear, Would murder as it fell. O Banquo, Banquo, Our royal master 's murder'd!	Oh, Banquo!

Our royal master 's murder'd	O gentle lady, 'Tis not for you to hear what I can speak: The repetition, in a woman's ear, Would murder as it fell. O Banquo, Banquo, Our royal master 's murder'd!	Our king has been murdered!

Banquo, Banquo, Our royal master 's murder'd!	O gentle lady, 'Tis not for you to hear what I can speak: The repetition, in a woman's ear, Would murder as it fell. O Banquo, Banquo, Our royal master 's murder'd!	Banquo, Banquo, our king is murdered!

Duff, I prithee, contradict thyself, And say it is not so.	Too cruel any where. Dear Duff, I prithee, contradict thyself, And say it is not so.	Duff, please contradict yourself and say it isn't true.

the mere lees	Had I but died an hour before this chance, I had lived a blessed time; for, from this instant, There 's nothing serious in mortality: All is but toys: renown and grace is dead; The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees Is left this vault to brag of.	Just the dregs.

serious in mortality: All is but toys: renown and grace is dead; The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees Is left this vault to brag of.	Had I but died an hour before this chance, I had lived a blessed time; for, from this instant, There 's nothing serious in mortality: All is but toys: renown and grace is dead; The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees Is left this vault to brag of.	anything important in life is gone. Everything is just meaningless play. Fame and honor are dead. The best part of life is over, and only the worthless dregs are left in this world to boast about.

fountain of your blood Is stopp'd; the very source of it is stopp'd.	You are, and do not know't: The spring, the head, the fountain of your blood Is stopp'd; the very source of it is stopp'd.	The source of your life is blocked; it's completely blocked.

Your royal father 's murder'd	Your royal father 's murder'd.	Your royal father was murdered.

Those of his chamber, as it seem'd, had done 't: Their hands and faces were an badged with blood; So were their daggers, which unwiped we found Upon their pillows: They stared, and were distracted; no man's life Was to be trusted with them.	Those of his chamber, as it seem'd, had done 't: Their hands and faces were an badged with blood; So were their daggers, which unwiped we found Upon their pillows: They stared, and were distracted; no man's life Was to be trusted with them.	It looked like his servants had done it. Their hands and faces were covered in blood, and so were their daggers, which we found uncleaned on their pillows. They were staring and out of their minds; no one could trust them with their life.

no man's life	Those of his chamber, as it seem'd, had done 't: Their hands and faces were an badged with blood; So were their daggers, which unwiped we found Upon their pillows: They stared, and were distracted; no man's life Was to be trusted with them.	No one's life

repent me of my fury, That I did kill them.	O, yet I do repent me of my fury, That I did kill them.	I regret my anger that made me kill them.

be wise, amazed, temperate and furious, Loyal and neutral, in a moment?	Who can be wise, amazed, temperate and furious, Loyal and neutral, in a moment? No man: The expedition my violent love Outrun the pauser, reason.	Can anyone be wise, shocked, calm and angry, faithful and impartial, all at the same time?

expedition my violent love Outrun the pauser, reason.	Who can be wise, amazed, temperate and furious, Loyal and neutral, in a moment? No man: The expedition my violent love Outrun the pauser, reason. Here lay Duncan, His silver skin laced with his golden blood; And his gash'd stabs look'd like a breach in nature For ruin's wasteful entrance: there, the murderers, Steep'd in the colours of their trade, their daggers Unmannerly breech'd with gore: who could refrain, That had a heart to love, and in that heart Courage to make 's love kno wn?	My passionate love acted faster than my reasoning could.

the pauser, reason	Who can be wise, amazed, temperate and furious, Loyal and neutral, in a moment? No man: The expedition my violent love Outrun the pauser, reason. Here lay Duncan, His silver skin laced with his golden blood; And his gash'd stabs look'd like a breach in nature For ruin's wasteful entrance: there, the murderers, Steep'd in the colours of their trade, their daggers Unmannerly breech'd with gore: who could refrain, That had a heart to love, and in that heart Courage to make 's love kno wn?	Reason, which makes you pause and think.

: there, the murderers	No man: The expedition my violent love Outrun the pauser, reason. Here lay Duncan, His silver skin laced with his golden blood; And his gash'd stabs look'd like a breach in nature For ruin's wasteful entrance: there, the murderers, Steep'd in the colours of their trade, their daggers Unmannerly breech'd with gore: who could refrain, That had a heart to love, and in that heart Courage to make 's love kno wn?	There were the murderers.

stabs look'd like a breach in nature For ruin's wasteful entrance: there, the murderers, Steep'd in the colours of their trade, their daggers Unmannerly breech'd with gore: who could refrain, That had a heart to love, and in that heart Courage to make 's love kno wn?	No man: The expedition my violent love Outrun the pauser, reason. Here lay Duncan, His silver skin laced with his golden blood; And his gash'd stabs look'd like a breach in nature For ruin's wasteful entrance: there, the murderers, Steep'd in the colours of their trade, their daggers Unmannerly breech'd with gore: who could refrain, That had a heart to love, and in that heart Courage to make 's love kno wn?	The stab wounds looked like nature itself had been broken open, allowing destruction to flood in. The murderers were there, soaked in the blood of their deed, their daggers crudely covered in gore. Who could have held back, if they had love in their heart and the courage to show it?

his gash'd stabs	No man: The expedition my violent love Outrun the pauser, reason. Here lay Duncan, His silver skin laced with his golden blood; And his gash'd stabs look'd like a breach in nature For ruin's wasteful entrance: there, the murderers, Steep'd in the colours of their trade, their daggers Unmannerly breech'd with gore: who could refrain, That had a heart to love, and in that heart Courage to make 's love kno wn?	his bloody stab wounds

ruin's wasteful entrance	No man: The expedition my violent love Outrun the pauser, reason. Here lay Duncan, His silver skin laced with his golden blood; And his gash'd stabs look'd like a breach in nature For ruin's wasteful entrance: there, the murderers, Steep'd in the colours of their trade, their daggers Unmannerly breech'd with gore: who could refrain, That had a heart to love, and in that heart Courage to make 's love kno wn?	a destructive flood

Aside to DONALBAIN]	[Aside to DONALBAIN] Why do we hold our tongues, That most may claim this argument for ours?	Why are we silent, when we have the strongest claim to speak about this?

Aside to MALCOLM]	[Aside to MALCOLM] What should be spoken here, where our fate, Hid in an auger-hole, may rush, and seize us?	What should we talk about here, where our destiny, hidden in a tiny hole, might suddenly attack us?

an auger-hole	[Aside to MALCOLM] What should be spoken here, where our fate, Hid in an auger-hole, may rush, and seize us? Let 's away; Our tears are not yet brew'd.	a tiny hidden space

fate, Hid in an auger-hole, may rush, and seize us?	[Aside to MALCOLM] What should be spoken here, where our fate, Hid in an auger-hole, may rush, and seize us? Let 's away; Our tears are not yet brew'd.	Destiny, hidden in a tiny space, might suddenly attack and capture us.

sorrow Upon the foot of motion.	Nor our strong sorrow Upon the foot of motion.	sadness slowing us down.

Nor our strong sorrow	Nor our strong sorrow Upon the foot of motion.	Nor our deep sadness.

suffer in exposure, let us meet, And question this most bloody piece of work, To know it further.	Look to the lady. And when we have our naked frailties hid, That suffer in exposure, let us meet, And question this most bloody piece of work, To know it further. Fears and scruples shake us: In the great hand of God I stand; and thence Against the undivulged pretence I fight Of treasonous malice.	When we've covered up our vulnerable weaknesses that are exposed, let's meet and investigate this terrible act of violence to understand it better.

our naked frailties	Look to the lady. And when we have our naked frailties hid, That suffer in exposure, let us meet, And question this most bloody piece of work, To know it further. Fears and scruples shake us: In the great hand of God I stand; and thence Against the undivulged pretence I fight Of treasonous malice.	our vulnerable weaknesses

treasonous malice	And when we have our naked frailties hid, That suffer in exposure, let us meet, And question this most bloody piece of work, To know it further. Fears and scruples shake us: In the great hand of God I stand; and thence Against the undivulged pretence I fight Of treasonous malice.	malicious treason

hand of God I stand; and thence Against the undivulged pretence I fight Of treasonous malice.	And when we have our naked frailties hid, That suffer in exposure, let us meet, And question this most bloody piece of work, To know it further. Fears and scruples shake us: In the great hand of God I stand; and thence Against the undivulged pretence I fight Of treasonous malice.	I stand with God, and with his help, I will fight against this hidden and treacherous evil.

the undivulged pretence	And when we have our naked frailties hid, That suffer in exposure, let us meet, And question this most bloody piece of work, To know it further. Fears and scruples shake us: In the great hand of God I stand; and thence Against the undivulged pretence I fight Of treasonous malice.	the hidden reason

manly readiness	Let's briefly put on manly readiness, And meet i' the hall together.	Let's get ready like men.

an unfelt sorrow	What will you do? Let's not consort with them: To show an unfelt sorrow is an office Which the false man does easy. I'll to England.	Sorrow you don't really feel.

office Which the false man does easy.	What will you do? Let's not consort with them: To show an unfelt sorrow is an office Which the false man does easy. I'll to England.	a task a liar can do easily.

keep us both the safer: where we are, There's daggers in men's smiles: the near in blood, The nearer bloody.	To Ireland, I; our separated fortune Shall keep us both the safer: where we are, There's daggers in men's smiles: the near in blood, The nearer bloody.	will keep us both safer. Here, people hide daggers behind their smiles; the closer you are in blood relation, the more likely they are to be bloody.

men's smiles	To Ireland, I; our separated fortune Shall keep us both the safer: where we are, There's daggers in men's smiles: the near in blood, The nearer bloody.	people pretending to be friendly

This murderous shaft	This murderous shaft that's shot Hath not yet lighted, and our safest way Is to avoid the aim. Therefore, to horse; And let us not be dainty of leave-taking, But shift away: there's warrant in that theft Which steals itself, when there's no mercy left.	This deadly arrow

shaft that's shot Hath not yet lighted, and our safest way Is to avoid the aim.	This murderous shaft that's shot Hath not yet lighted, and our safest way Is to avoid the aim. Therefore, to horse; And let us not be dainty of leave-taking, But shift away: there's warrant in that theft Which steals itself, when there's no mercy left.	The arrow has been shot but hasn't landed yet, so the safest thing to do is get out of its path.

dainty of leave-taking, But shift away: there's warrant in that theft Which steals itself, when there's no mercy left.	This murderous shaft that's shot Hath not yet lighted, and our safest way Is to avoid the aim. Therefore, to horse; And let us not be dainty of leave-taking, But shift away: there's warrant in that theft Which steals itself, when there's no mercy left.	careful about saying goodbye, but let's get out of here. It's justified to sneak away when there's no other choice.

remember well: Within the volume of which time I have seen Hours dreadful and things strange; but this sore night Hath trifled former knowings.	Threescore and ten I can remember well: Within the volume of which time I have seen Hours dreadful and things strange; but this sore night Hath trifled former knowings.	I remember well: In all that time, I've seen terrible things; but this awful night makes everything I knew before seem insignificant.

does the face of earth entomb, When living light should kiss it?	Ah, good father, Thou seest, the heavens, as troubled with man's act, Threaten his bloody stage: by the clock, 'tis day, And yet dark night strangles the travelling lamp: Is't night's predominance, or the day's shame, That darkness does the face of earth entomb, When living light should kiss it?	bury the earth, when sunlight should be shining on it?

Is't night's predominance	Ah, good father, Thou seest, the heavens, as troubled with man's act, Threaten his bloody stage: by the clock, 'tis day, And yet dark night strangles the travelling lamp: Is't night's predominance, or the day's shame, That darkness does the face of earth entomb, When living light should kiss it?	Is night winning?

man's act	Ah, good father, Thou seest, the heavens, as troubled with man's act, Threaten his bloody stage: by the clock, 'tis day, And yet dark night strangles the travelling lamp: Is't night's predominance, or the day's shame, That darkness does the face of earth entomb, When living light should kiss it?	What people have done.

the day's shame	Ah, good father, Thou seest, the heavens, as troubled with man's act, Threaten his bloody stage: by the clock, 'tis day, And yet dark night strangles the travelling lamp: Is't night's predominance, or the day's shame, That darkness does the face of earth entomb, When living light should kiss it?	The day's disgrace.

deed that's done.	'Tis unnatural, Even like the deed that's done. On Tuesday last, A falcon, towering in her pride of place, Was by a mousing owl hawk'd at and kill'd.	What has been done.

a mousing owl	'Tis unnatural, Even like the deed that's done. On Tuesday last, A falcon, towering in her pride of place, Was by a mousing owl hawk'd at and kill'd.	an owl that hunts mice

falcon, towering in her pride of place, Was by a mousing owl hawk'd at and kill'd.	'Tis unnatural, Even like the deed that's done. On Tuesday last, A falcon, towering in her pride of place, Was by a mousing owl hawk'd at and kill'd.	A falcon, soaring high in the sky, was attacked and killed by an owl that usually hunts mice.

'gainst obedience	And Duncan's horses—a thing most strange and certain— Beauteous and swift, the minions of their race, Turn'd wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out, Contending 'gainst obedience, as they would make War with mankind.	Against being controlled.

Duncan's horses	And Duncan's horses—a thing most strange and certain— Beauteous and swift, the minions of their race, Turn'd wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out, Contending 'gainst obedience, as they would make War with mankind.	Duncan's horses

flung out, Contending 'gainst obedience, as they would make War with mankind.	And Duncan's horses—a thing most strange and certain— Beauteous and swift, the minions of their race, Turn'd wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out, Contending 'gainst obedience, as they would make War with mankind.	Broke free, fighting against being controlled, as if they wanted to attack humans.

did so, to the amazement of mine eyes That look'd	They did so, to the amazement of mine eyes That look'd upon't.	They did it, to my great surprise as I watched.

the good Macduff	upon't. Here comes the good Macduff. How goes the world, sir, now?	the good Macduff

bloody deed	Is't known who did this more than bloody deed?	Murder.

Is't known who did this more than bloody deed?	Is't known who did this more than bloody deed?	Do we know who committed this extremely violent act?

Those that Macbeth hath slain.	Those that Macbeth hath slain.	Those Macbeth has killed.

the king's two sons	They were suborn'd: Malcolm and Donalbain, the king's two sons, Are stol'n away and fled; which puts upon them Suspicion of the deed.	the king's two sons

Suspicion of the deed.	They were suborn'd: Malcolm and Donalbain, the king's two sons, Are stol'n away and fled; which puts upon them Suspicion of the deed.	They are suspected of the murder.

'Gainst nature	'Gainst nature still! Thriftless ambition, that wilt ravin up Thine own life's means!	Against what is natural.

Thriftless ambition	'Gainst nature still! Thriftless ambition, that wilt ravin up Thine own life's means! Then 'tis most like The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth.	Wasteful ambition

ambition, that wilt ravin up Thine own life's means!	'Gainst nature still! Thriftless ambition, that wilt ravin up Thine own life's means! Then 'tis most like The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth.	ambition, that devours your own resources!

Thine own life's means	'Gainst nature still! Thriftless ambition, that wilt ravin up Thine own life's means! Then 'tis most like The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth.	What sustains your life.

fall upon Macbeth.	Thriftless ambition, that wilt ravin up Thine own life's means! Then 'tis most like The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth.	Macbeth will likely become king.

gone to Scone To be invested.	He is already named, and gone to Scone To be invested.	gone to Scone to be crowned king.

Duncan's body	Where is Duncan's body?	Duncan's body

The sacred storehouse	Carried to Colmekill, The sacred storehouse of his predecessors, And guardian of their bones.	The holy burial place.

Will you to Scone?	Will you to Scone?	Will you go to Scone?

'll to Fife.	No, cousin, I'll to Fife.	I'm going to Fife.

our old robes	Well, may you see things well done there: adieu! Lest our old robes sit easier than our new!	our old ways

Farewell, father.	Farewell, father.	Farewell, father.

God's benison	God's benison go with you; and with those That would make good of bad, and friends of foes!	God's blessing

good of bad, and friends of foes!	God's benison go with you; and with those That would make good of bad, and friends of foes!	Turning bad things into good, and enemies into friends!

Cawdor, Glamis, all, As the weird women promised, and, I fear, Thou play'dst most foully for't: yet it was said It should not stand in thy posterity, But that myself should be the root and father Of many kings.	Thou hast it now: king, Cawdor, Glamis, all, As the weird women promised, and, I fear, Thou play'dst most foully for't: yet it was said It should not stand in thy posterity, But that myself should be the root and father Of many kings. If there come truth from them— As upon thee, Macbeth, their speeches shine— Why, by the verities on thee made good, May they not be my oracles as well, And set me up in hope?	You've got it all now: king, Cawdor, Glamis, everything the witches promised. And I suspect you cheated to get it. But it was also said that the crown wouldn't stay in your family, but that I would be the ancestor of many kings.

thy posterity	Thou hast it now: king, Cawdor, Glamis, all, As the weird women promised, and, I fear, Thou play'dst most foully for't: yet it was said It should not stand in thy posterity, But that myself should be the root and father Of many kings. If there come truth from them— As upon thee, Macbeth, their speeches shine— Why, by the verities on thee made good, May they not be my oracles as well, And set me up in hope?	Your descendants

play'dst most foully for't	Thou hast it now: king, Cawdor, Glamis, all, As the weird women promised, and, I fear, Thou play'dst most foully for't: yet it was said It should not stand in thy posterity, But that myself should be the root and father Of many kings. If there come truth from them— As upon thee, Macbeth, their speeches shine— Why, by the verities on thee made good, May they not be my oracles as well, And set me up in hope?	you cheated to get it

verities on thee made good, May they not be my oracles as well, And set me up in hope?	Thou hast it now: king, Cawdor, Glamis, all, As the weird women promised, and, I fear, Thou play'dst most foully for't: yet it was said It should not stand in thy posterity, But that myself should be the root and father Of many kings. If there come truth from them— As upon thee, Macbeth, their speeches shine— Why, by the verities on thee made good, May they not be my oracles as well, And set me up in hope? But hush!	If the prophecies about you came true, why can't their prophecies about me also come true, and give me hope?

forgotten, It had been as a gap in our great feast, And all-thing unbecoming.	If he had been forgotten, It had been as a gap in our great feast, And all-thing unbecoming.	Forgotten? It would have been like a missing piece at a great celebration, completely inappropriate.

our great feast	If he had been forgotten, It had been as a gap in our great feast, And all-thing unbecoming.	a major event for us

hold a solemn supper sir, And I'll request your presence.	To-night we hold a solemn supper sir, And I'll request your presence.	We're having a formal dinner tonight, and I'd like you to be there.

a solemn supper sir	To-night we hold a solemn supper sir, And I'll request your presence.	A serious dinner, sir.

a most indissoluble tie	Let your highness Command upon me; to the which my duties Are with a most indissoluble tie For ever knit.	a bond that cannot be broken

Are with a most indissoluble tie For ever knit.	Let your highness Command upon me; to the which my duties Are with a most indissoluble tie For ever knit.	Are forever bound.

take to-morrow.	We should have else desired your good advice, Which still hath been both grave and prosperous, In this day's council; but we'll take to-morrow. Is't far you ride?	We'll talk tomorrow.

this day's council	We should have else desired your good advice, Which still hath been both grave and prosperous, In this day's council; but we'll take to-morrow. Is't far you ride?	Today's meeting.

borrower of the night For a dark hour or twain.	As far, my lord, as will fill up the time 'Twixt this and supper: go not my horse the better, I must become a borrower of the night For a dark hour or twain.	I'll have to travel at night for an hour or two.

not our feast	Fail not our feast.	Don't miss our feast.

confessing Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers With strange invention: but of that to-morrow, When therewithal we shall have cause of state Craving us jointly.	We hear, our bloody cousins are bestow'd In England and in Ireland, not confessing Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers With strange invention: but of that to-morrow, When therewithal we shall have cause of state Craving us jointly. Hie you to horse: adieu, Till you return at night.	admitting their brutal murder of the king, and spreading strange lies to everyone who will listen. But we'll discuss that tomorrow, when matters of state require our joint attention.

Their cruel parricide	We hear, our bloody cousins are bestow'd In England and in Ireland, not confessing Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers With strange invention: but of that to-morrow, When therewithal we shall have cause of state Craving us jointly. Hie you to horse: adieu, Till you return at night.	Their brutal killing of the king.

our bloody cousins	We hear, our bloody cousins are bestow'd In England and in Ireland, not confessing Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers With strange invention: but of that to-morrow, When therewithal we shall have cause of state Craving us jointly. Hie you to horse: adieu, Till you return at night.	Our murderous relatives

you to horse: adieu, Till you return at night.	We hear, our bloody cousins are bestow'd In England and in Ireland, not confessing Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers With strange invention: but of that to-morrow, When therewithal we shall have cause of state Craving us jointly. Hie you to horse: adieu, Till you return at night. Goes Fleance with you?	Get on your horse. Goodbye, until you return tonight.

Hie you	We hear, our bloody cousins are bestow'd In England and in Ireland, not confessing Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers With strange invention: but of that to-morrow, When therewithal we shall have cause of state Craving us jointly. Hie you to horse: adieu, Till you return at night. Goes Fleance with you?	Hurry.

Goes Fleance with you?	Hie you to horse: adieu, Till you return at night. Goes Fleance with you?	Is Fleance going with you?

lord: our time does call upon 's.	Ay, my good lord: our time does call upon 's.	My lord, it's time for us to go.

sure of foot; And so I do commend you to their backs.	I wish your horses swift and sure of foot; And so I do commend you to their backs. Farewell.	Surefooted; And so I entrust you to their care.

keep ourself Till supper-time alone: while then, God be with you!	Farewell. Let every man be master of his time Till seven at night: to make society The sweeter welcome, we will keep ourself Till supper-time alone: while then, God be with you! Sirrah, a word with you: attend those men Our pleasure?	I'll be alone until supper. Goodbye for now!

Sirrah, a word with you: attend those men Our pleasure?	Let every man be master of his time Till seven at night: to make society The sweeter welcome, we will keep ourself Till supper-time alone: while then, God be with you! Sirrah, a word with you: attend those men Our pleasure?	Hey, I need a word with you. See to those men according to my wishes.

fears in Banquo Stick deep; and in his royalty of nature Reigns that which would be fear'd: 'tis much he dares; And, to that dauntless temper of his mind, He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valour To act in safety.	Bring them before us. To be thus is nothing; But to be safely thus.—Our fears in Banquo Stick deep; and in his royalty of nature Reigns that which would be fear'd: 'tis much he dares; And, to that dauntless temper of his mind, He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valour To act in safety. There is none but he Whose being I do fear: and, under him, My Genius is rebuked; as, it is said, Mark Antony's was by Caesar.	I deeply fear Banquo; there's something kingly and formidable about him. He's incredibly brave, and his intelligence guides his courage to act cautiously.

that dauntless temper	Bring them before us. To be thus is nothing; But to be safely thus.—Our fears in Banquo Stick deep; and in his royalty of nature Reigns that which would be fear'd: 'tis much he dares; And, to that dauntless temper of his mind, He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valour To act in safety. There is none but he Whose being I do fear: and, under him, My Genius is rebuked; as, it is said, Mark Antony's was by Caesar.	that fearless nature

was by Caesar.	To be thus is nothing; But to be safely thus.—Our fears in Banquo Stick deep; and in his royalty of nature Reigns that which would be fear'd: 'tis much he dares; And, to that dauntless temper of his mind, He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valour To act in safety. There is none but he Whose being I do fear: and, under him, My Genius is rebuked; as, it is said, Mark Antony's was by Caesar. He chid the sisters When first they put the name of king upon me, And bade them speak to him: then prophet-like They hail'd him father to a line of kings: Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown, And put a barren sceptre in my gripe, Thence to be wrench'd with an unlineal hand, No son of mine succeeding.	was by Caesar.

a fruitless crown	There is none but he Whose being I do fear: and, under him, My Genius is rebuked; as, it is said, Mark Antony's was by Caesar. He chid the sisters When first they put the name of king upon me, And bade them speak to him: then prophet-like They hail'd him father to a line of kings: Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown, And put a barren sceptre in my gripe, Thence to be wrench'd with an unlineal hand, No son of mine succeeding. If 't be so, For Banquo's issue have I filed my mind; For them the gracious Duncan have I murder'd; Put rancours in the vessel of my peace Only for them; and mine eternal jewel	A crown that won't lead to any heirs.

gripe, Thence to be wrench'd with an unlineal hand, No son of mine succeeding.	There is none but he Whose being I do fear: and, under him, My Genius is rebuked; as, it is said, Mark Antony's was by Caesar. He chid the sisters When first they put the name of king upon me, And bade them speak to him: then prophet-like They hail'd him father to a line of kings: Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown, And put a barren sceptre in my gripe, Thence to be wrench'd with an unlineal hand, No son of mine succeeding. If 't be so, For Banquo's issue have I filed my mind; For them the gracious Duncan have I murder'd; Put rancours in the vessel of my peace Only for them; and mine eternal jewel	grip, to be ripped away by someone not of my bloodline, with none of my sons to follow me.

a barren sceptre	There is none but he Whose being I do fear: and, under him, My Genius is rebuked; as, it is said, Mark Antony's was by Caesar. He chid the sisters When first they put the name of king upon me, And bade them speak to him: then prophet-like They hail'd him father to a line of kings: Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown, And put a barren sceptre in my gripe, Thence to be wrench'd with an unlineal hand, No son of mine succeeding. If 't be so, For Banquo's issue have I filed my mind; For them the gracious Duncan have I murder'd; Put rancours in the vessel of my peace Only for them; and mine eternal jewel	an empty, useless scepter

an unlineal hand	There is none but he Whose being I do fear: and, under him, My Genius is rebuked; as, it is said, Mark Antony's was by Caesar. He chid the sisters When first they put the name of king upon me, And bade them speak to him: then prophet-like They hail'd him father to a line of kings: Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown, And put a barren sceptre in my gripe, Thence to be wrench'd with an unlineal hand, No son of mine succeeding. If 't be so, For Banquo's issue have I filed my mind; For them the gracious Duncan have I murder'd; Put rancours in the vessel of my peace Only for them; and mine eternal jewel	Someone not in my family line.

the gracious Duncan	He chid the sisters When first they put the name of king upon me, And bade them speak to him: then prophet-like They hail'd him father to a line of kings: Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown, And put a barren sceptre in my gripe, Thence to be wrench'd with an unlineal hand, No son of mine succeeding. If 't be so, For Banquo's issue have I filed my mind; For them the gracious Duncan have I murder'd; Put rancours in the vessel of my peace Only for them; and mine eternal jewel Given to the common enemy of man, To make them kings, the seed of Banquo kings!	The kind Duncan

Banquo's issue	He chid the sisters When first they put the name of king upon me, And bade them speak to him: then prophet-like They hail'd him father to a line of kings: Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown, And put a barren sceptre in my gripe, Thence to be wrench'd with an unlineal hand, No son of mine succeeding. If 't be so, For Banquo's issue have I filed my mind; For them the gracious Duncan have I murder'd; Put rancours in the vessel of my peace Only for them; and mine eternal jewel Given to the common enemy of man, To make them kings, the seed of Banquo kings!	Banquo's descendants

be so, For Banquo's issue have I filed my mind; For them the gracious Duncan have I murder'd; Put rancours in the vessel of my peace Only for them; and mine eternal jewel	He chid the sisters When first they put the name of king upon me, And bade them speak to him: then prophet-like They hail'd him father to a line of kings: Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown, And put a barren sceptre in my gripe, Thence to be wrench'd with an unlineal hand, No son of mine succeeding. If 't be so, For Banquo's issue have I filed my mind; For them the gracious Duncan have I murder'd; Put rancours in the vessel of my peace Only for them; and mine eternal jewel Given to the common enemy of man, To make them kings, the seed of Banquo kings!	If that's true, I've ruined my conscience for Banquo's descendants. I murdered good King Duncan for them. I've poisoned my peace of mind just for them, and given my soul

Banquo kings	If 't be so, For Banquo's issue have I filed my mind; For them the gracious Duncan have I murder'd; Put rancours in the vessel of my peace Only for them; and mine eternal jewel Given to the common enemy of man, To make them kings, the seed of Banquo kings! Rather than so, come fate into the list.	Banquo's sons become kings!

enemy of man, To make them kings, the seed of Banquo kings!	If 't be so, For Banquo's issue have I filed my mind; For them the gracious Duncan have I murder'd; Put rancours in the vessel of my peace Only for them; and mine eternal jewel Given to the common enemy of man, To make them kings, the seed of Banquo kings! Rather than so, come fate into the list.	just to make Banquo's descendants kings!

champion me to the utterance!	Rather than so, come fate into the list. And champion me to the utterance! Who's there!	Defend me to the death!

consider'd of my speeches?	Well then, now Have you consider'd of my speeches? Know That it was he in the times past which held you So under fortune, which you thought had been Our innocent self: this I made good to you In our last conference, pass'd in probation with you, How you were borne in hand, how cross'd, the instruments, Who wrought with them, and all things else that might To half a soul and to a notion crazed Say 'Thus did Banquo.'	Have you thought about what I said?

notion crazed Say 'Thus did Banquo.'	Well then, now Have you consider'd of my speeches? Know That it was he in the times past which held you So under fortune, which you thought had been Our innocent self: this I made good to you In our last conference, pass'd in probation with you, How you were borne in hand, how cross'd, the instruments, Who wrought with them, and all things else that might To half a soul and to a notion crazed Say 'Thus did Banquo.'	even a crazy idea would say, 'Banquo did this.'

how cross'd	Well then, now Have you consider'd of my speeches? Know That it was he in the times past which held you So under fortune, which you thought had been Our innocent self: this I made good to you In our last conference, pass'd in probation with you, How you were borne in hand, how cross'd, the instruments, Who wrought with them, and all things else that might To half a soul and to a notion crazed Say 'Thus did Banquo.'	how you were betrayed

patience so predominant in your nature That you can let this go?	I did so, and went further, which is now Our point of second meeting. Do you find Your patience so predominant in your nature That you can let this go? Are you so gospell'd	Are you so patient that you can ignore this?

pray for this good man and for his issue, Whose heavy hand hath bow'd you to the grave And beggar'd yours for ever?	Are you so gospell'd To pray for this good man and for his issue, Whose heavy hand hath bow'd you to the grave And beggar'd yours for ever?	pray for this good man and his children, whose oppressive rule has ruined you and impoverished your family forever?

men, my liege.	We are men, my liege.	Men, my lord.

which bounteous nature	Ay, in the catalogue ye go for men; As hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, curs, Shoughs, water-rugs and demi-wolves, are clept All by the name of dogs: the valued file Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle, The housekeeper, the hunter, every one According to the gift which bounteous nature Hath in him closed; whereby he does receive Particular addition. from the bill That writes them all alike: and so of men.	that generous nature

go for men; As hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, curs, Shoughs, water-rugs and demi-wolves, are clept All by the name of dogs: the valued file Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle, The housekeeper, the hunter, every one According to the gift which bounteous nature Hath in him closed; whereby he does receive Particular addition.	Ay, in the catalogue ye go for men; As hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, curs, Shoughs, water-rugs and demi-wolves, are clept All by the name of dogs: the valued file Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle, The housekeeper, the hunter, every one According to the gift which bounteous nature Hath in him closed; whereby he does receive Particular addition. from the bill That writes them all alike: and so of men.	pass for men. Just as different breeds of dogs—like hounds, greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, curs, shoughs, water-rugs, and demi-wolves—are all called dogs, a careful list distinguishes the fast ones, the slow ones, the clever ones, the guard dogs, and the hunting dogs, each according to their natural talents. Because of these talents, each dog gets a specific label.

Not i' the worst rank	from the bill That writes them all alike: and so of men. Now, if you have a station in the file, Not i' the worst rank of manhood, say 't; And I will put that business in your bosoms, Whose execution takes your enemy off, Grapples you to the heart and love of us, Who wear our health but sickly in his life, Which in his death were perfect.	Not in the lowest position.

put that business in your bosoms, Whose execution takes your enemy off, Grapples you to the heart and love of us, Who wear our health but sickly in his life, Which in his death were perfect.	from the bill That writes them all alike: and so of men. Now, if you have a station in the file, Not i' the worst rank of manhood, say 't; And I will put that business in your bosoms, Whose execution takes your enemy off, Grapples you to the heart and love of us, Who wear our health but sickly in his life, Which in his death were perfect.	I'll give you a task that, if you do it, will get rid of our enemy, make us love and appreciate you, since we're only half-alive while he's alive, but would be completely healthy if he were dead.

blows and buffets of the world Have so incensed that I am reckless what I do to spite the world.	I am one, my liege, Whom the vile blows and buffets of the world Have so incensed that I am reckless what I do to spite the world.	The world's hardships have made me so angry that I don't care what I do to get back at it.

weary with disasters, tugg'd with fortune, That I would set my lie on any chance, To mend it, or be rid on't.	And I another So weary with disasters, tugg'd with fortune, That I would set my lie on any chance, To mend it, or be rid on't.	Tired of disasters and beaten by fortune, I'd risk my life on any chance to improve it or end it all.

Both of you Know Banquo was your enemy.	Both of you Know Banquo was your enemy.	Both of you know Banquo was your enemy.

barefaced power	So is he mine; and in such bloody distance, That every minute of his being thrusts Against my near'st of life: and though I could With barefaced power sweep him from my sight And bid my will avouch it, yet I must not, For certain friends that are both his and mine, Whose loves I may not drop, but wail his fall Who I myself struck down; and thence it is, That I to your assistance do make love, Masking the business from the common eye For sundry weighty reasons.	obvious force

sweep him from my sight And bid my will avouch it, yet I must not, For certain friends that are both his and mine, Whose loves I may not drop, but wail his fall Who I myself struck down; and thence it is, That I to your assistance do make love, Masking the business from the common eye For sundry weighty reasons.	So is he mine; and in such bloody distance, That every minute of his being thrusts Against my near'st of life: and though I could With barefaced power sweep him from my sight And bid my will avouch it, yet I must not, For certain friends that are both his and mine, Whose loves I may not drop, but wail his fall Who I myself struck down; and thence it is, That I to your assistance do make love, Masking the business from the common eye For sundry weighty reasons.	erase him from my life and justify it with my power, but I can't. We have mutual friends whose support I can't lose, yet I'd have to mourn his downfall if I were the one to destroy him. That's why I'm asking for your help, keeping it secret from everyone else for important reasons.

his being thrusts	So is he mine; and in such bloody distance, That every minute of his being thrusts Against my near'st of life: and though I could With barefaced power sweep him from my sight And bid my will avouch it, yet I must not, For certain friends that are both his and mine, Whose loves I may not drop, but wail his fall Who I myself struck down; and thence it is, That I to your assistance do make love, Masking the business from the common eye For sundry weighty reasons.	his existence threatens

sundry weighty reasons	So is he mine; and in such bloody distance, That every minute of his being thrusts Against my near'st of life: and though I could With barefaced power sweep him from my sight And bid my will avouch it, yet I must not, For certain friends that are both his and mine, Whose loves I may not drop, but wail his fall Who I myself struck down; and thence it is, That I to your assistance do make love, Masking the business from the common eye For sundry weighty reasons.	several important reasons

is no less material to me	Your spirits shine through you. Within this hour at most I will advise you where to plant yourselves; Acquaint you with the perfect spy o' the time, The moment on't; for't must be done to-night, And something from the palace; always thought That I require a clearness: and with him— To leave no rubs nor botches in the work— Fleance his son, that keeps him company, Whose absence is no less material to me Than is his father's, must embrace the fate Of that dark hour.	is just as important to me

fate Of that dark hour.	Within this hour at most I will advise you where to plant yourselves; Acquaint you with the perfect spy o' the time, The moment on't; for't must be done to-night, And something from the palace; always thought That I require a clearness: and with him— To leave no rubs nor botches in the work— Fleance his son, that keeps him company, Whose absence is no less material to me Than is his father's, must embrace the fate Of that dark hour. Resolve yourselves apart: I'll come to you anon.	The same fate as that night.

come to you anon.	Than is his father's, must embrace the fate Of that dark hour. Resolve yourselves apart: I'll come to you anon.	I'll come to you soon.

call upon you straight: abide within.	I'll call upon you straight: abide within. It is concluded.	I need you to stay inside. That's the decision.

thy soul's flight	It is concluded. Banquo, thy soul's flight, If it find heaven, must find it out to-night.	your soul's journey

spent, Where our desire is got without content: 'Tis safer to be that which we destroy Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy.	Nought's had, all's spent, Where our desire is got without content: 'Tis safer to be that which we destroy Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy. How now, my lord!	Everything's wasted, our desire is achieved but we're not happy. It's better to be the thing we kill than to live with uncertain happiness from killing it.

doubtful joy	Nought's had, all's spent, Where our desire is got without content: 'Tis safer to be that which we destroy Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy. How now, my lord!	Uncertain happiness.

fancies your companions making, Using those thoughts which should indeed have died With them they think on?	How now, my lord! why do you keep alone, Of sorriest fancies your companions making, Using those thoughts which should indeed have died With them they think on? Things without all remedy Should be without regard: what's done is done.	letting sad thoughts be your friends, dwelling on memories that should have faded away with the people you're thinking about?

be without regard: what's done is done.	why do you keep alone, Of sorriest fancies your companions making, Using those thoughts which should indeed have died With them they think on? Things without all remedy Should be without regard: what's done is done.	Don't dwell on it: what's done is done.

our poor malice	We have scotch'd the snake, not kill'd it: She'll close and be herself, whilst our poor malice Remains in danger of her former tooth. But let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds suffer, Ere we will eat our meal in fear and sleep In the affliction of these terrible dreams That shake us nightly: better be with the dead, Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace, Than on the torture of the mind to lie In restless ecstasy.	our weak hatred

Remains in danger of her former tooth.	We have scotch'd the snake, not kill'd it: She'll close and be herself, whilst our poor malice Remains in danger of her former tooth. But let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds suffer, Ere we will eat our meal in fear and sleep In the affliction of these terrible dreams That shake us nightly: better be with the dead, Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace, Than on the torture of the mind to lie In restless ecstasy.	We're still in danger from her old bite.

restless ecstasy	We have scotch'd the snake, not kill'd it: She'll close and be herself, whilst our poor malice Remains in danger of her former tooth. But let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds suffer, Ere we will eat our meal in fear and sleep In the affliction of these terrible dreams That shake us nightly: better be with the dead, Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace, Than on the torture of the mind to lie In restless ecstasy. Duncan is in his grave; After life's fitful fever he sleeps well; Treason has done his worst: nor steel, nor poison, Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing, Can touch him further.	Tortured anxiety

suffer, Ere we will eat our meal in fear and sleep In the affliction of these terrible dreams That shake us nightly: better be with the dead, Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace, Than on the torture of the mind to lie In restless ecstasy.	We have scotch'd the snake, not kill'd it: She'll close and be herself, whilst our poor malice Remains in danger of her former tooth. But let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds suffer, Ere we will eat our meal in fear and sleep In the affliction of these terrible dreams That shake us nightly: better be with the dead, Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace, Than on the torture of the mind to lie In restless ecstasy. Duncan is in his grave; After life's fitful fever he sleeps well; Treason has done his worst: nor steel, nor poison, Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing, Can touch him further.	We'd rather see the world destroyed than live in fear, haunted by nightmares every night. It's better to be dead, like those we killed to gain peace, than to suffer mental torment and restless agitation.

steel, nor poison, Malice domestic, foreign levy	But let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds suffer, Ere we will eat our meal in fear and sleep In the affliction of these terrible dreams That shake us nightly: better be with the dead, Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace, Than on the torture of the mind to lie In restless ecstasy. Duncan is in his grave; After life's fitful fever he sleeps well; Treason has done his worst: nor steel, nor poison, Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing, Can touch him further.	Neither weapons, nor poison, internal treachery, nor foreign invasion

sleeps well; Treason has done his worst: nor steel, nor poison, Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing, Can touch him further.	But let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds suffer, Ere we will eat our meal in fear and sleep In the affliction of these terrible dreams That shake us nightly: better be with the dead, Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace, Than on the torture of the mind to lie In restless ecstasy. Duncan is in his grave; After life's fitful fever he sleeps well; Treason has done his worst: nor steel, nor poison, Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing, Can touch him further.	Sleeps soundly now; betrayal has done all it can. Neither weapons, nor poison, internal conflict, foreign invasion, nothing can hurt him anymore.

life's fitful fever	But let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds suffer, Ere we will eat our meal in fear and sleep In the affliction of these terrible dreams That shake us nightly: better be with the dead, Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace, Than on the torture of the mind to lie In restless ecstasy. Duncan is in his grave; After life's fitful fever he sleeps well; Treason has done his worst: nor steel, nor poison, Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing, Can touch him further.	life's restless struggles

your rugged looks	Come on; Gentle my lord, sleek o'er your rugged looks; Be bright and jovial among your guests to-night.	your harsh expression

Gentle my lord, sleek o'er your rugged looks; Be bright and jovial among your guests to-night.	Come on; Gentle my lord, sleek o'er your rugged looks; Be bright and jovial among your guests to-night.	My lord, smooth out your worried expression; be happy and cheerful with your guests tonight.

Present him eminence, both with eye and tongue:	So shall I, love; and so, I pray, be you: Let your remembrance apply to Banquo; Present him eminence, both with eye and tongue: Unsafe the while, that we Must lave our honours in these flattering streams, And make our faces vizards to our hearts, Disguising what they are.	Show him respect and honor, both in what you say and how you look at him.

lave our honours in these flattering streams, And make our faces vizards to our hearts, Disguising what they are.	So shall I, love; and so, I pray, be you: Let your remembrance apply to Banquo; Present him eminence, both with eye and tongue: Unsafe the while, that we Must lave our honours in these flattering streams, And make our faces vizards to our hearts, Disguising what they are.	We must bathe our reputations in this insincere praise, and hide our true feelings behind false faces, disguising who we really are.

these flattering streams	So shall I, love; and so, I pray, be you: Let your remembrance apply to Banquo; Present him eminence, both with eye and tongue: Unsafe the while, that we Must lave our honours in these flattering streams, And make our faces vizards to our hearts, Disguising what they are.	these insincere praises

nature's copy	But in them nature's copy's not eterne.	nature's imitation

night's yawning peal	There's comfort yet; they are assailable; Then be thou jocund: ere the bat hath flown His cloister'd flight, ere to black Hecate's summons The shard-borne beetle with his drowsy hums Hath rung night's yawning peal, there shall be done A deed of dreadful note.	Night's loud, echoing sound

black Hecate's summons	There's comfort yet; they are assailable; Then be thou jocund: ere the bat hath flown His cloister'd flight, ere to black Hecate's summons The shard-borne beetle with his drowsy hums Hath rung night's yawning peal, there shall be done A deed of dreadful note.	Hecate's dark call

His cloister'd flight	There's comfort yet; they are assailable; Then be thou jocund: ere the bat hath flown His cloister'd flight, ere to black Hecate's summons The shard-borne beetle with his drowsy hums Hath rung night's yawning peal, there shall be done A deed of dreadful note.	Its sheltered flight.

The shard-borne beetle	There's comfort yet; they are assailable; Then be thou jocund: ere the bat hath flown His cloister'd flight, ere to black Hecate's summons The shard-borne beetle with his drowsy hums Hath rung night's yawning peal, there shall be done A deed of dreadful note.	The beetle that flies with a shard (piece of broken pottery).

dreadful note	There's comfort yet; they are assailable; Then be thou jocund: ere the bat hath flown His cloister'd flight, ere to black Hecate's summons The shard-borne beetle with his drowsy hums Hath rung night's yawning peal, there shall be done A deed of dreadful note.	Something terrible will happen.

ere to black Hecate's summons The shard-borne beetle with his drowsy hums Hath rung night's yawning peal, there shall be done A deed of dreadful note.	There's comfort yet; they are assailable; Then be thou jocund: ere the bat hath flown His cloister'd flight, ere to black Hecate's summons The shard-borne beetle with his drowsy hums Hath rung night's yawning peal, there shall be done A deed of dreadful note.	Before the beetle that flies with broken shell wings has finished its buzzing and signaled the start of the night, something terrible will be done.

his drowsy hums	There's comfort yet; they are assailable; Then be thou jocund: ere the bat hath flown His cloister'd flight, ere to black Hecate's summons The shard-borne beetle with his drowsy hums Hath rung night's yawning peal, there shall be done A deed of dreadful note.	His sleepy buzzing.

dearest chuck	Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck, Till thou applaud the deed. Come, seeling night, Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day; And with thy bloody and invisible hand Cancel and tear to pieces that great bond Which keeps me pale!	dear love

applaud the deed.	Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck, Till thou applaud the deed. Come, seeling night, Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day; And with thy bloody and invisible hand Cancel and tear to pieces that great bond Which keeps me pale!	praise the action.

tear to pieces that great bond Which keeps me pale!	Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck, Till thou applaud the deed. Come, seeling night, Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day; And with thy bloody and invisible hand Cancel and tear to pieces that great bond Which keeps me pale! Light thickens; and the crow Makes wing to the rooky wood:	destroy the agreement that's making me anxious!

pitiful day	Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck, Till thou applaud the deed. Come, seeling night, Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day; And with thy bloody and invisible hand Cancel and tear to pieces that great bond Which keeps me pale! Light thickens; and the crow Makes wing to the rooky wood:	day that inspires pity

the rooky wood	Come, seeling night, Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day; And with thy bloody and invisible hand Cancel and tear to pieces that great bond Which keeps me pale! Light thickens; and the crow Makes wing to the rooky wood: Good things of day begin to droop and drowse; While night's black agents to their preys do rouse.	the woods where rooks live

Makes wing to the rooky wood:	Come, seeling night, Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day; And with thy bloody and invisible hand Cancel and tear to pieces that great bond Which keeps me pale! Light thickens; and the crow Makes wing to the rooky wood: Good things of day begin to droop and drowse; While night's black agents to their preys do rouse.	Flies to the woods filled with crows.

night's black agents	Light thickens; and the crow Makes wing to the rooky wood: Good things of day begin to droop and drowse; While night's black agents to their preys do rouse. Thou marvell'st at my words: but hold thee still; Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill.	evil creatures of the night

agents to their preys do rouse.	Light thickens; and the crow Makes wing to the rooky wood: Good things of day begin to droop and drowse; While night's black agents to their preys do rouse. Thou marvell'st at my words: but hold thee still; Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill.	evil creatures wake up to hunt.

delivers Our offices and what we have to do To the direction just.	He needs not our mistrust, since he delivers Our offices and what we have to do To the direction just.	He carries out our duties and what we need to do in the right way.

the lated traveller	Then stand with us. The west yet glimmers with some streaks of day: Now spurs the lated traveller apace To gain the timely inn; and near approaches The subject of our watch.	the traveler who is late

note of expectation Already are i' the court.	Then 'tis he: the rest That are within the note of expectation Already are i' the court.	are expected and are already at court.

'tis he	Then 'tis he: the rest That are within the note of expectation Already are i' the court.	It's him.

from hence to the palace gate Make it their walk.	Almost a mile: but he does usually, So all men do, from hence to the palace gate Make it their walk.	Make it their usual walk to the palace gate.

O, treachery	O, treachery! Fly, good Fleance, fly, fly, fly!	Oh, betrayal!

Fleance, fly, fly, fly!	O, treachery! Fly, good Fleance, fly, fly, fly! Thou mayst revenge.	Fleance, run away! Run away! Run away!

sit down: at first And last the hearty welcome.	You know your own degrees; sit down: at first And last the hearty welcome.	Sit down. You are welcome from beginning to end.

the hearty welcome	You know your own degrees; sit down: at first And last the hearty welcome.	The hearty welcome.

Thanks to your majesty.	Thanks to your majesty.	Thanks to your majesty.

the humble host	Ourself will mingle with society, And play the humble host. Our hostess keeps her state, but in best time We will require her welcome.	The modest host

mingle with society, And play the humble host.	Ourself will mingle with society, And play the humble host. Our hostess keeps her state, but in best time We will require her welcome.	Join the party and act as a gracious host.

Be large in mirth; anon we'll drink a measure The table round.	See, they encounter thee with their hearts' thanks. Both sides are even: here I'll sit i' the midst: Be large in mirth; anon we'll drink a measure The table round. There's blood on thy face.	Be generous with your joy; soon we'll all drink a toast around the table.

'Tis Banquo	'Tis Banquo's then.	It's Banquo's then.

like for Fleance:	Thou art the best o' the cut-throats: yet he's good That did the like for Fleance: if thou didst it, Thou art the nonpareil.	the same to Fleance

didst it, Thou art the nonpareil.	Thou art the best o' the cut-throats: yet he's good That did the like for Fleance: if thou didst it, Thou art the nonpareil.	If you did it, you're the best.

saucy doubts	Then comes my fit again: I had else been perfect, Whole as the marble, founded as the rock, As broad and general as the casing air: But now I am cabin'd, cribb'd, confined, bound in To saucy doubts and fears. But Banquo's safe?	troublesome doubts

founded as the rock, As broad and general as the casing air: But now I am cabin'd, cribb'd, confined, bound in To saucy doubts and fears.	Then comes my fit again: I had else been perfect, Whole as the marble, founded as the rock, As broad and general as the casing air: But now I am cabin'd, cribb'd, confined, bound in To saucy doubts and fears. But Banquo's safe?	Solid as a rock, as free and open as the air. But now I'm trapped, squeezed, and tied up by arrogant doubts and fears.

the casing air	Then comes my fit again: I had else been perfect, Whole as the marble, founded as the rock, As broad and general as the casing air: But now I am cabin'd, cribb'd, confined, bound in To saucy doubts and fears. But Banquo's safe?	the surrounding air

twenty trenched gashes	Ay, my good lord: safe in a ditch he bides, With twenty trenched gashes on his head; The least a death to nature.	twenty deep cuts

the grown serpent	Thanks for that: There the grown serpent lies; the worm that's fled Hath nature that in time will venom breed, No teeth for the present. Get thee gone: to-morrow We'll hear, ourselves, again.	the adult snake

Hath nature	Thanks for that: There the grown serpent lies; the worm that's fled Hath nature that in time will venom breed, No teeth for the present. Get thee gone: to-morrow We'll hear, ourselves, again.	It has the potential.

worm that's fled Hath nature that in time will venom breed, No teeth for the present.	Thanks for that: There the grown serpent lies; the worm that's fled Hath nature that in time will venom breed, No teeth for the present. Get thee gone: to-morrow We'll hear, ourselves, again.	The young snake that escaped will eventually grow poisonous, but it's harmless for now.

Sweet remembrancer	Sweet remembrancer! Now, good digestion wait on appetite, And health on both!	Sweet reminder!

good digestion	Sweet remembrancer! Now, good digestion wait on appetite, And health on both!	Good digestion.

our country's honour roof'd	Here had we now our country's honour roof'd, Were the graced person of our Banquo present; Who may I rather challenge for unkindness Than pity for mischance!	our country's honor secured

the graced person	Here had we now our country's honour roof'd, Were the graced person of our Banquo present; Who may I rather challenge for unkindness Than pity for mischance!	The honored presence

our Banquo present	Here had we now our country's honour roof'd, Were the graced person of our Banquo present; Who may I rather challenge for unkindness Than pity for mischance!	if Banquo were here

challenge for unkindness Than pity for mischance!	Here had we now our country's honour roof'd, Were the graced person of our Banquo present; Who may I rather challenge for unkindness Than pity for mischance!	accuse of rudeness rather than feel sorry for an accident!

Please't your highness To grace us with your royal company.	His absence, sir, Lays blame upon his promise. Please't your highness To grace us with your royal company.	If it pleases you, your Highness, to honor us with your presence.

Thy gory locks	Thou canst not say I did it: never shake Thy gory locks at me.	Your bloody hair

shake Thy gory locks at me.	Thou canst not say I did it: never shake Thy gory locks at me.	Don't shake your bloody hair at me.

passion: Feed, and regard him not.	Sit, worthy friends: my lord is often thus, And hath been from his youth: pray you, keep seat; The fit is momentary; upon a thought He will again be well: if much you note him, You shall offend him and extend his passion: Feed, and regard him not. Are you a man?	His outburst will pass; ignore him and eat. Are you a man?

look on that Which might appal the devil.	Ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that Which might appal the devil.	See something that would terrify the devil himself.

the air-drawn dagger	O proper stuff! This is the very painting of your fear: This is the air-drawn dagger which, you said, Led you to Duncan. O, these flaws and starts, Impostors to true fear, would well become A woman's story at a winter's fire, Authorized by her grandam.	the imaginary dagger

O, these flaws and starts, Impostors to true fear, would well become A woman's story at a winter's fire, Authorized by her grandam.	This is the very painting of your fear: This is the air-drawn dagger which, you said, Led you to Duncan. O, these flaws and starts, Impostors to true fear, would well become A woman's story at a winter's fire, Authorized by her grandam. Shame itself!	Oh, these outbursts and sudden reactions, pretending to be real fear, would be suitable for an old wives' tale told by a grandmother by the fireside in winter.

a winter's fire	This is the very painting of your fear: This is the air-drawn dagger which, you said, Led you to Duncan. O, these flaws and starts, Impostors to true fear, would well become A woman's story at a winter's fire, Authorized by her grandam. Shame itself!	a fire in winter

A woman's story	This is the very painting of your fear: This is the air-drawn dagger which, you said, Led you to Duncan. O, these flaws and starts, Impostors to true fear, would well become A woman's story at a winter's fire, Authorized by her grandam. Shame itself!	Something an old woman would tell by the fire.

look but on a stool.	Why do you make such faces? When all's done, You look but on a stool.	You're just looking at a stool.

canst nod, speak too.	Why, what care I? If thou canst nod, speak too. If charnel-houses and our graves must send Those that we bury back, our monuments Shall be the maws of kites.	you can nod, you can speak too.

be the maws of kites.	If thou canst nod, speak too. If charnel-houses and our graves must send Those that we bury back, our monuments Shall be the maws of kites.	will be the stomachs of birds of prey.

What, quite unmann'd in folly?	What, quite unmann'd in folly?	What, completely lost in foolishness?

Fie, for shame!	Fie, for shame!	For shame!

Blood hath	Blood hath been shed ere now, i' the olden time, Ere human statute purged the gentle weal; Ay, and since too, murders have been perform'd Too terrible for the ear: the times have been, That, when the brains were out, the man would die, And there an end; but now they rise again, With twenty mortal murders on their crowns, And push us from our stools: this is more strange Than such a murder is.	Blood has

rise again, With twenty mortal murders on their crowns, And push us from our stools: this is more strange Than such a murder is.	Blood hath been shed ere now, i' the olden time, Ere human statute purged the gentle weal; Ay, and since too, murders have been perform'd Too terrible for the ear: the times have been, That, when the brains were out, the man would die, And there an end; but now they rise again, With twenty mortal murders on their crowns, And push us from our stools: this is more strange Than such a murder is.	But now they come back to haunt us, bringing with them the weight of all the terrible acts they committed, and they unseat us from our positions. This is even stranger than the murder itself.

Ere human statute	Blood hath been shed ere now, i' the olden time, Ere human statute purged the gentle weal; Ay, and since too, murders have been perform'd Too terrible for the ear: the times have been, That, when the brains were out, the man would die, And there an end; but now they rise again, With twenty mortal murders on their crowns, And push us from our stools: this is more strange Than such a murder is.	Before laws were made by people

twenty mortal murders	Blood hath been shed ere now, i' the olden time, Ere human statute purged the gentle weal; Ay, and since too, murders have been perform'd Too terrible for the ear: the times have been, That, when the brains were out, the man would die, And there an end; but now they rise again, With twenty mortal murders on their crowns, And push us from our stools: this is more strange Than such a murder is.	twenty deadly wounds

the gentle weal	Blood hath been shed ere now, i' the olden time, Ere human statute purged the gentle weal; Ay, and since too, murders have been perform'd Too terrible for the ear: the times have been, That, when the brains were out, the man would die, And there an end; but now they rise again, With twenty mortal murders on their crowns, And push us from our stools: this is more strange Than such a murder is.	the peace of society

a strange infirmity	I do forget. Do not muse at me, my most worthy friends, I have a strange infirmity, which is nothing To those that know me. Come, love and health to all; Then I'll sit down.	a weird problem

infirmity, which is nothing To those that know me.	I do forget. Do not muse at me, my most worthy friends, I have a strange infirmity, which is nothing To those that know me. Come, love and health to all; Then I'll sit down.	weakness that's not a problem for those who know me.

Banquo, whom we miss; Would he were here!	Give me some wine; fill full. I drink to the general joy o' the whole table, And to our dear friend Banquo, whom we miss; Would he were here! to all, and him, we thirst, And all to all.	We miss Banquo. I wish he were here!

him, we thirst, And all to all.	I drink to the general joy o' the whole table, And to our dear friend Banquo, whom we miss; Would he were here! to all, and him, we thirst, And all to all.	We long for him to be here, and a toast to everyone!

glare with!	let the earth hide thee! Thy bones are marrowless, thy blood is cold; Thou hast no speculation in those eyes Which thou dost glare with!	glare with!

Think of this, good peers, But as a thing of custom: 'tis no other; Only it spoils the pleasure of the time.	Think of this, good peers, But as a thing of custom: 'tis no other; Only it spoils the pleasure of the time.	Think of this, my friends, as just something we do out of habit. It's nothing more than that. It just ruins the fun.

the rugged Russian bear	What man dare, I dare: Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear, The arm'd rhinoceros, or the Hyrcan tiger; Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves Shall never tremble: or be alive again, And dare me to the desert with thy sword; If trembling I inhabit then, protest me The baby of a girl. Hence, horrible shadow!	a fierce Russian bear

the Hyrcan tiger	What man dare, I dare: Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear, The arm'd rhinoceros, or the Hyrcan tiger; Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves Shall never tremble: or be alive again, And dare me to the desert with thy sword; If trembling I inhabit then, protest me The baby of a girl. Hence, horrible shadow!	The Caspian tiger

The arm'd rhinoceros	What man dare, I dare: Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear, The arm'd rhinoceros, or the Hyrcan tiger; Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves Shall never tremble: or be alive again, And dare me to the desert with thy sword; If trembling I inhabit then, protest me The baby of a girl. Hence, horrible shadow!	The armored rhinoceros

inhabit then, protest me The baby of a girl.	What man dare, I dare: Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear, The arm'd rhinoceros, or the Hyrcan tiger; Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves Shall never tremble: or be alive again, And dare me to the desert with thy sword; If trembling I inhabit then, protest me The baby of a girl. Hence, horrible shadow!	If I'm trembling then, call me a little girl.

Unreal mockery	Hence, horrible shadow! Unreal mockery, hence! Why, so: being gone, I am a man again.	Unreal illusion.

most admired disorder	You have displaced the mirth, broke the good meeting, With most admired disorder.	Total chaos.

broke the good meeting, With most admired disorder.	You have displaced the mirth, broke the good meeting, With most admired disorder.	ruined our good time with unbelievable chaos.

a summer's cloud	Can such things be, And overcome us like a summer's cloud, Without our special wonder? You make me strange Even to the disposition that I owe, When now I think you can behold such sights, And keep the natural ruby of your cheeks, When mine is blanched with fear.	a passing storm

overcome us like a summer's cloud, Without our special wonder?	Can such things be, And overcome us like a summer's cloud, Without our special wonder? You make me strange Even to the disposition that I owe, When now I think you can behold such sights, And keep the natural ruby of your cheeks, When mine is blanched with fear.	Overwhelm us so suddenly, without us even being amazed?

keep the natural ruby of your cheeks, When mine is blanched with fear.	Can such things be, And overcome us like a summer's cloud, Without our special wonder? You make me strange Even to the disposition that I owe, When now I think you can behold such sights, And keep the natural ruby of your cheeks, When mine is blanched with fear.	Your face is still red, while mine is pale with fear.

Stand not upon the order of your going, But go at once.	I pray you, speak not; he grows worse and worse; Question enrages him. At once, good night: Stand not upon the order of your going, But go at once.	Don't worry about who goes first, just leave immediately.

The secret'st man	It will have blood; they say, blood will have blood: Stones have been known to move and trees to speak; Augurs and understood relations have By magot-pies and choughs and rooks brought forth The secret'st man of blood. What is the night?	The most secretive murderer.

relations have By magot-pies and choughs and rooks brought forth The secret'st man of blood.	It will have blood; they say, blood will have blood: Stones have been known to move and trees to speak; Augurs and understood relations have By magot-pies and choughs and rooks brought forth The secret'st man of blood. What is the night?	Even relationships have been revealed by magpies, jackdaws, and rooks, exposing the most secretive murderer.

keep a servant fee'd.	I hear it by the way; but I will send: There's not a one of them but in his house I keep a servant fee'd. I will to-morrow, And betimes I will, to the weird sisters: More shall they speak; for now I am bent to know, By the worst means, the worst.	have a servant in his house paid by me.

am bent to know, By the worst means, the worst.	I hear it by the way; but I will send: There's not a one of them but in his house I keep a servant fee'd. I will to-morrow, And betimes I will, to the weird sisters: More shall they speak; for now I am bent to know, By the worst means, the worst. For mine own good, All causes shall give way: I am in blood Stepp'd in so far that, should I wade no more, Returning were as tedious as go o'er: Strange things I have in head, that will to hand; Which must be acted ere they may be scann'd.	I am determined to know the worst, even if it means using the worst methods.

blood Stepp'd	I will to-morrow, And betimes I will, to the weird sisters: More shall they speak; for now I am bent to know, By the worst means, the worst. For mine own good, All causes shall give way: I am in blood Stepp'd in so far that, should I wade no more, Returning were as tedious as go o'er: Strange things I have in head, that will to hand; Which must be acted ere they may be scann'd.	in blood Stepp'd in so far that, should I wade no more, Returning were as tedious as go o'er

give way: I am in blood Stepp'd in so far that, should I wade no more, Returning were as tedious as go o'er: Strange things I have in head, that will to hand; Which must be acted ere they may be scann'd.	I will to-morrow, And betimes I will, to the weird sisters: More shall they speak; for now I am bent to know, By the worst means, the worst. For mine own good, All causes shall give way: I am in blood Stepp'd in so far that, should I wade no more, Returning were as tedious as go o'er: Strange things I have in head, that will to hand; Which must be acted ere they may be scann'd.	must make way. I'm so deep in blood that stopping now is as hard as continuing forward. I have crazy plans that I must do, and I must do them before I think about them.

fear that wants hard use: We are yet but young in deed.	Come, we'll to sleep. My strange and self-abuse Is the initiate fear that wants hard use: We are yet but young in deed.	Fear that needs practice to overcome; we are inexperienced in action.

the initiate fear	Come, we'll to sleep. My strange and self-abuse Is the initiate fear that wants hard use: We are yet but young in deed.	Fear that comes from inexperience.

are, Saucy and overbold?	Have I not reason, beldams as you are, Saucy and overbold? How did you dare To trade and traffic with Macbeth In riddles and affairs of death; And I, the mistress of your charms, The close contriver of all harms, Was never call'd to bear my part, Or show the glory of our art?	to be so rude and disrespectful?

The close contriver	Have I not reason, beldams as you are, Saucy and overbold? How did you dare To trade and traffic with Macbeth In riddles and affairs of death; And I, the mistress of your charms, The close contriver of all harms, Was never call'd to bear my part, Or show the glory of our art? And, which is worse, all you have done Hath been but for a wayward son, Spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do, Loves for his own ends, not for you.	The secret planner.

contriver of all harms, Was never call'd to bear my part, Or show the glory of our art?	Have I not reason, beldams as you are, Saucy and overbold? How did you dare To trade and traffic with Macbeth In riddles and affairs of death; And I, the mistress of your charms, The close contriver of all harms, Was never call'd to bear my part, Or show the glory of our art? And, which is worse, all you have done Hath been but for a wayward son, Spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do, Loves for his own ends, not for you.	The planner of all evil, and I wasn't even asked to participate or show off our powerful magic?

a wayward son	How did you dare To trade and traffic with Macbeth In riddles and affairs of death; And I, the mistress of your charms, The close contriver of all harms, Was never call'd to bear my part, Or show the glory of our art? And, which is worse, all you have done Hath been but for a wayward son, Spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do, Loves for his own ends, not for you. But make amends now: get you gone, And at the pit of Acheron Meet me i' the morning: thither he Will come to know his destiny: Your vessels and your spells provide, Your charms and every thing beside.	A spoiled brat

been but for a wayward son, Spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do, Loves for his own ends, not for you.	How did you dare To trade and traffic with Macbeth In riddles and affairs of death; And I, the mistress of your charms, The close contriver of all harms, Was never call'd to bear my part, Or show the glory of our art? And, which is worse, all you have done Hath been but for a wayward son, Spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do, Loves for his own ends, not for you. But make amends now: get you gone, And at the pit of Acheron Meet me i' the morning: thither he Will come to know his destiny: Your vessels and your spells provide, Your charms and every thing beside.	It's all been for a spoiled, angry son who, like everyone else, only cares about what he can get, not about you.

Meet me i' the morning: thither he Will come to know his destiny: Your vessels and your spells provide, Your charms and every thing beside.	And, which is worse, all you have done Hath been but for a wayward son, Spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do, Loves for his own ends, not for you. But make amends now: get you gone, And at the pit of Acheron Meet me i' the morning: thither he Will come to know his destiny: Your vessels and your spells provide, Your charms and every thing beside. I am for the air; this night I'll spend Unto a dismal and a fatal end:	Meet me there in the morning: he will come there to learn his fate. Bring your potions, spells, charms, and everything else you have.

spend Unto a dismal and a fatal end:	But make amends now: get you gone, And at the pit of Acheron Meet me i' the morning: thither he Will come to know his destiny: Your vessels and your spells provide, Your charms and every thing beside. I am for the air; this night I'll spend Unto a dismal and a fatal end: Great business must be wrought ere noon:	I'll devote tonight to something dark and deadly.

such artificial sprites	Great business must be wrought ere noon: Upon the corner of the moon There hangs a vaporous drop profound; I'll catch it ere it come to ground: And that distill'd by magic sleights Shall raise such artificial sprites As by the strength of their illusion Shall draw him on to his confusion: He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear He hopes 'bove wisdom, grace and fear: And you all know, security Is mortals' chiefest enemy.	artificial spirits like illusions

a vaporous drop	Great business must be wrought ere noon: Upon the corner of the moon There hangs a vaporous drop profound; I'll catch it ere it come to ground: And that distill'd by magic sleights Shall raise such artificial sprites As by the strength of their illusion Shall draw him on to his confusion: He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear He hopes 'bove wisdom, grace and fear: And you all know, security Is mortals' chiefest enemy.	a misty drop

magic sleights	Great business must be wrought ere noon: Upon the corner of the moon There hangs a vaporous drop profound; I'll catch it ere it come to ground: And that distill'd by magic sleights Shall raise such artificial sprites As by the strength of their illusion Shall draw him on to his confusion: He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear He hopes 'bove wisdom, grace and fear: And you all know, security Is mortals' chiefest enemy.	magical tricks

hangs a vaporous drop profound; I'll catch it ere it come to ground: And that distill'd by magic sleights Shall raise such artificial sprites As by the strength of their illusion Shall draw him on to his confusion: He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear He hopes 'bove wisdom, grace and fear:	Great business must be wrought ere noon: Upon the corner of the moon There hangs a vaporous drop profound; I'll catch it ere it come to ground: And that distill'd by magic sleights Shall raise such artificial sprites As by the strength of their illusion Shall draw him on to his confusion: He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear He hopes 'bove wisdom, grace and fear: And you all know, security Is mortals' chiefest enemy.	A deep, misty drop hangs there; I'll catch it before it falls. Distilled with magic tricks, it will create artificial spirits whose powerful illusions will lead him to ruin. He will defy fate, scorn death, and have hopes exceeding wisdom, grace, and fear.

scorn death	Great business must be wrought ere noon: Upon the corner of the moon There hangs a vaporous drop profound; I'll catch it ere it come to ground: And that distill'd by magic sleights Shall raise such artificial sprites As by the strength of their illusion Shall draw him on to his confusion: He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear He hopes 'bove wisdom, grace and fear: And you all know, security Is mortals' chiefest enemy.	Make fun of death.

bove wisdom	Great business must be wrought ere noon: Upon the corner of the moon There hangs a vaporous drop profound; I'll catch it ere it come to ground: And that distill'd by magic sleights Shall raise such artificial sprites As by the strength of their illusion Shall draw him on to his confusion: He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear He hopes 'bove wisdom, grace and fear: And you all know, security Is mortals' chiefest enemy.	above wisdom

mortals' chiefest enemy	Upon the corner of the moon There hangs a vaporous drop profound; I'll catch it ere it come to ground: And that distill'd by magic sleights Shall raise such artificial sprites As by the strength of their illusion Shall draw him on to his confusion: He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear He hopes 'bove wisdom, grace and fear: And you all know, security Is mortals' chiefest enemy. Hark!	mortals' greatest enemy

you all know, security Is mortals' chiefest enemy.	Upon the corner of the moon There hangs a vaporous drop profound; I'll catch it ere it come to ground: And that distill'd by magic sleights Shall raise such artificial sprites As by the strength of their illusion Shall draw him on to his confusion: He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear He hopes 'bove wisdom, grace and fear: And you all know, security Is mortals' chiefest enemy. Hark!	You all know that feeling safe is a person's biggest weakness.

Sits in a foggy cloud, and stays for me.	Hark! I am call'd; my little spirit, see, Sits in a foggy cloud, and stays for me.	Is sitting in a foggy cloud, waiting for me.

a foggy cloud	Hark! I am call'd; my little spirit, see, Sits in a foggy cloud, and stays for me.	a cloudy fog

thoughts, Which can interpret further: only, I say, Things have been strangely borne.	My former speeches have but hit your thoughts, Which can interpret further: only, I say, Things have been strangely borne. The gracious Duncan Was pitied of Macbeth: marry, he was dead: And the right-valiant Banquo walk'd too late; Whom, you may say, if't please you, Fleance kill'd, For Fleance fled: men must not walk too late.	thoughts, which can understand more than I say. I'll just say that things have happened strangely.

pitied of Macbeth: marry, he was dead: And the right-valiant Banquo walk'd too late; Whom, you may say, if't please you, Fleance kill'd, For Fleance fled: men must not walk too late.	My former speeches have but hit your thoughts, Which can interpret further: only, I say, Things have been strangely borne. The gracious Duncan Was pitied of Macbeth: marry, he was dead: And the right-valiant Banquo walk'd too late; Whom, you may say, if't please you, Fleance kill'd, For Fleance fled: men must not walk too late. Who cannot want the thought how monstrous It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain To kill their gracious father?	Macbeth pitied Duncan, sure, but Duncan was dead. And the very brave Banquo walked out too late at night. You could say Fleance killed him, if you like, since Fleance ran away. People shouldn't be out walking so late.

The gracious Duncan	My former speeches have but hit your thoughts, Which can interpret further: only, I say, Things have been strangely borne. The gracious Duncan Was pitied of Macbeth: marry, he was dead: And the right-valiant Banquo walk'd too late; Whom, you may say, if't please you, Fleance kill'd, For Fleance fled: men must not walk too late. Who cannot want the thought how monstrous It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain To kill their gracious father?	The good King Duncan

thought how monstrous It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain To kill their gracious father?	The gracious Duncan Was pitied of Macbeth: marry, he was dead: And the right-valiant Banquo walk'd too late; Whom, you may say, if't please you, Fleance kill'd, For Fleance fled: men must not walk too late. Who cannot want the thought how monstrous It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain To kill their gracious father? damned fact!	How awful it was for Malcolm and Donalbain to kill their kind father!

their gracious father	The gracious Duncan Was pitied of Macbeth: marry, he was dead: And the right-valiant Banquo walk'd too late; Whom, you may say, if't please you, Fleance kill'd, For Fleance fled: men must not walk too late. Who cannot want the thought how monstrous It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain To kill their gracious father? damned fact!	Their kind father

the two delinquents	How it did grieve Macbeth! did he not straight In pious rage the two delinquents tear, That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep? Was not that nobly done?	The two guilty ones

pious rage	How it did grieve Macbeth! did he not straight In pious rage the two delinquents tear, That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep? Was not that nobly done?	righteous anger

drink and thralls of sleep?	How it did grieve Macbeth! did he not straight In pious rage the two delinquents tear, That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep? Was not that nobly done?	drunk and fast asleep?

the men deny't	Was not that nobly done? Ay, and wisely too; For 'twould have anger'd any heart alive To hear the men deny't. So that, I say, He has borne all things well: and I do think That had he Duncan's sons under his key— As, an't please heaven, he shall not—they should find What 'twere to kill a father; so should Fleance.	the men denied it

he Duncan's sons	Ay, and wisely too; For 'twould have anger'd any heart alive To hear the men deny't. So that, I say, He has borne all things well: and I do think That had he Duncan's sons under his key— As, an't please heaven, he shall not—they should find What 'twere to kill a father; so should Fleance. But, peace!	He has Duncan's sons

twere to kill a father; so should Fleance.	Ay, and wisely too; For 'twould have anger'd any heart alive To hear the men deny't. So that, I say, He has borne all things well: and I do think That had he Duncan's sons under his key— As, an't please heaven, he shall not—they should find What 'twere to kill a father; so should Fleance. But, peace!	it's like to kill a father; Fleance would find out too.

the tyrant's feast	But, peace! for from broad words and 'cause he fail'd His presence at the tyrant's feast, I hear Macduff lives in disgrace: sir, can you tell Where he bestows himself?	The king's banquet.

lives in disgrace: sir, can you tell Where he bestows himself?	But, peace! for from broad words and 'cause he fail'd His presence at the tyrant's feast, I hear Macduff lives in disgrace: sir, can you tell Where he bestows himself?	is out of favor. Sir, do you know where he is staying?

the most pious Edward	The son of Duncan, From whom this tyrant holds the due of birth Lives in the English court, and is received Of the most pious Edward with such grace That the malevolence of fortune nothing Takes from his high respect: thither Macduff Is gone to pray the holy king, upon his aid To wake Northumberland and warlike Siward: That, by the help of these—with Him above To ratify the work—we may again Give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights, Free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives, Do faithful homage and receive free honours: All which we pine for now: and this report Hath so exasperate the king that he Prepares for some attempt of war.	the very religious King Edward

faithful homage	The son of Duncan, From whom this tyrant holds the due of birth Lives in the English court, and is received Of the most pious Edward with such grace That the malevolence of fortune nothing Takes from his high respect: thither Macduff Is gone to pray the holy king, upon his aid To wake Northumberland and warlike Siward: That, by the help of these—with Him above To ratify the work—we may again Give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights, Free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives, Do faithful homage and receive free honours: All which we pine for now: and this report Hath so exasperate the king that he Prepares for some attempt of war.	Loyal service

free honours	The son of Duncan, From whom this tyrant holds the due of birth Lives in the English court, and is received Of the most pious Edward with such grace That the malevolence of fortune nothing Takes from his high respect: thither Macduff Is gone to pray the holy king, upon his aid To wake Northumberland and warlike Siward: That, by the help of these—with Him above To ratify the work—we may again Give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights, Free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives, Do faithful homage and receive free honours: All which we pine for now: and this report Hath so exasperate the king that he Prepares for some attempt of war.	Receive honors freely.

gone to pray the holy king, upon his aid To wake Northumberland and warlike Siward: That, by the help of these—with Him above To ratify the work—we may again Give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights, Free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives, Do faithful homage and receive free honours: All which we pine for now: and this report Hath so exasperate the king that he Prepares for some attempt of war.	The son of Duncan, From whom this tyrant holds the due of birth Lives in the English court, and is received Of the most pious Edward with such grace That the malevolence of fortune nothing Takes from his high respect: thither Macduff Is gone to pray the holy king, upon his aid To wake Northumberland and warlike Siward: That, by the help of these—with Him above To ratify the work—we may again Give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights, Free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives, Do faithful homage and receive free honours: All which we pine for now: and this report Hath so exasperate the king that he Prepares for some attempt of war.	[Macduff] has gone to ask the King of England for help in rousing Northumberland and the experienced soldier Siward. With their help, and God's blessing, we can once again have food on our tables, sleep peacefully at night, enjoy feasts without fear of murder, and freely show our loyalty and receive the honors we deserve, all of which we desperately long for now. This news has angered the king so much that he is preparing for war.

warlike Siward	The son of Duncan, From whom this tyrant holds the due of birth Lives in the English court, and is received Of the most pious Edward with such grace That the malevolence of fortune nothing Takes from his high respect: thither Macduff Is gone to pray the holy king, upon his aid To wake Northumberland and warlike Siward: That, by the help of these—with Him above To ratify the work—we may again Give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights, Free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives, Do faithful homage and receive free honours: All which we pine for now: and this report Hath so exasperate the king that he Prepares for some attempt of war.	Siward, a skilled military leader

Sent he to Macduff?	Sent he to Macduff?	Did he send word to Macduff?

time That clogs me with this answer.'	He did: and with an absolute 'Sir, not I,' The cloudy messenger turns me his back, And hums, as who should say 'You'll rue the time That clogs me with this answer.'	Wastes my time with this answer.

an absolute 'Sir, not I	He did: and with an absolute 'Sir, not I,' The cloudy messenger turns me his back, And hums, as who should say 'You'll rue the time That clogs me with this answer.'	a flat "No, sir, not me."

a swift blessing	And that well might Advise him to a caution, to hold what distance His wisdom can provide. Some holy angel Fly to the court of England and unfold His message ere he come, that a swift blessing May soon return to this our suffering country Under a hand accursed!	A quick reward.

court of England and unfold His message ere he come, that a swift blessing May soon return to this our suffering country Under a hand accursed!	And that well might Advise him to a caution, to hold what distance His wisdom can provide. Some holy angel Fly to the court of England and unfold His message ere he come, that a swift blessing May soon return to this our suffering country Under a hand accursed!	the English court and reveal his message before he arrives, so a quick blessing can return to our suffering country, which is under a cursed ruler!

the brinded cat	Thrice the brinded cat hath mew'd.	striped cat

the hedge-pig	Thrice and once the hedge-pig whined.	hedgehog

the cauldron go	Round about the cauldron go; In the poison'd entrails throw. Toad, that under cold stone Days and nights has thirty-one Swelter'd venom sleeping got, Boil thou first i' the charmed pot.	Walk around the cauldron.

Round about the cauldron go; In the poison'd entrails throw.	Round about the cauldron go; In the poison'd entrails throw. Toad, that under cold stone Days and nights has thirty-one Swelter'd venom sleeping got, Boil thou first i' the charmed pot.	Circle the cauldron; throw in the poisoned guts.

venom sleeping got, Boil thou first i' the charmed pot.	Round about the cauldron go; In the poison'd entrails throw. Toad, that under cold stone Days and nights has thirty-one Swelter'd venom sleeping got, Boil thou first i' the charmed pot.	Poison that's been brewing, boil first in the magic pot.

the charmed pot	Round about the cauldron go; In the poison'd entrails throw. Toad, that under cold stone Days and nights has thirty-one Swelter'd venom sleeping got, Boil thou first i' the charmed pot.	The magic pot

thirty-one Swelter'd	Round about the cauldron go; In the poison'd entrails throw. Toad, that under cold stone Days and nights has thirty-one Swelter'd venom sleeping got, Boil thou first i' the charmed pot.	thirty-one Sweated

Double, double toil	Double, double toil and trouble; Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.	Double, double the work.

cauldron bubble	Double, double toil and trouble; Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.	Cauldron bubble.

a hell-broth boil	Fillet of a fenny snake, In the cauldron boil and bake; Eye of newt and toe of frog, Wool of bat and tongue of dog, Adder's fork and blind-worm's sting, Lizard's leg and owlet's wing, For a charm of powerful trouble, Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.	A hell-broth boil

tongue of dog, Adder's fork and blind-worm's sting, Lizard's leg and owlet's wing, For a charm of powerful trouble, Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.	Fillet of a fenny snake, In the cauldron boil and bake; Eye of newt and toe of frog, Wool of bat and tongue of dog, Adder's fork and blind-worm's sting, Lizard's leg and owlet's wing, For a charm of powerful trouble, Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.	Dog's tongue, adder's tongue and slow worm's stinger, lizard's leg and baby owl's wing, to make a powerfully troublesome spell, like a hellish brew boiling and bubbling.

blind-worm's sting	Fillet of a fenny snake, In the cauldron boil and bake; Eye of newt and toe of frog, Wool of bat and tongue of dog, Adder's fork and blind-worm's sting, Lizard's leg and owlet's wing, For a charm of powerful trouble, Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.	Slow-worm's stinger

Lizard's leg	Fillet of a fenny snake, In the cauldron boil and bake; Eye of newt and toe of frog, Wool of bat and tongue of dog, Adder's fork and blind-worm's sting, Lizard's leg and owlet's wing, For a charm of powerful trouble, Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.	Lizard's leg

the cauldron boil	Fillet of a fenny snake, In the cauldron boil and bake; Eye of newt and toe of frog, Wool of bat and tongue of dog, Adder's fork and blind-worm's sting, Lizard's leg and owlet's wing, For a charm of powerful trouble, Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.	Boil the cauldron.

a fenny snake	Fillet of a fenny snake, In the cauldron boil and bake; Eye of newt and toe of frog, Wool of bat and tongue of dog, Adder's fork and blind-worm's sting, Lizard's leg and owlet's wing, For a charm of powerful trouble, Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.	A swamp snake

cauldron bubble	Double, double toil and trouble; Fire burn and cauldron bubble.	Cauldron, bubble.

tooth of wolf, Witches' mummy, maw and gulf Of the ravin'd salt-sea shark, Root of hemlock digg'd	Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf, Witches' mummy, maw and gulf Of the ravin'd salt-sea shark, Root of hemlock digg'd i' the dark, Liver of blaspheming Jew, Gall of goat, and slips of yew Silver'd in the moon's eclipse, Nose of Turk and Tartar's lips, Finger of birth-strangled babe Ditch-deliver'd by a drab, Make the gruel thick and slab: Add thereto a tiger's chaudron,	wolf's tooth, witch's mummy, the throat and stomach of a ravenous saltwater shark, hemlock root dug up

the ravin'd salt-sea shark	Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf, Witches' mummy, maw and gulf Of the ravin'd salt-sea shark, Root of hemlock digg'd i' the dark, Liver of blaspheming Jew, Gall of goat, and slips of yew Silver'd in the moon's eclipse, Nose of Turk and Tartar's lips, Finger of birth-strangled babe Ditch-deliver'd by a drab, Make the gruel thick and slab: Add thereto a tiger's chaudron,	The ravenous saltwater shark

the moon's eclipse	Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf, Witches' mummy, maw and gulf Of the ravin'd salt-sea shark, Root of hemlock digg'd i' the dark, Liver of blaspheming Jew, Gall of goat, and slips of yew Silver'd in the moon's eclipse, Nose of Turk and Tartar's lips, Finger of birth-strangled babe Ditch-deliver'd by a drab, Make the gruel thick and slab: Add thereto a tiger's chaudron, For the ingredients of our cauldron.	When the moon is blocked out by the earth.

Nose of Turk and Tartar's lips, Finger of birth-strangled babe Ditch-deliver'd by a drab, Make the gruel thick and slab: Add thereto a tiger's chaudron,	Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf, Witches' mummy, maw and gulf Of the ravin'd salt-sea shark, Root of hemlock digg'd i' the dark, Liver of blaspheming Jew, Gall of goat, and slips of yew Silver'd in the moon's eclipse, Nose of Turk and Tartar's lips, Finger of birth-strangled babe Ditch-deliver'd by a drab, Make the gruel thick and slab: Add thereto a tiger's chaudron, For the ingredients of our cauldron.	A Turk's nose and a Tartar's lips, The finger of a baby strangled at birth, And dumped in a ditch by a prostitute, Make the potion thick and gloppy. Add a tiger's entrails to it.

birth-strangled babe Ditch-deliver'd	Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf, Witches' mummy, maw and gulf Of the ravin'd salt-sea shark, Root of hemlock digg'd i' the dark, Liver of blaspheming Jew, Gall of goat, and slips of yew Silver'd in the moon's eclipse, Nose of Turk and Tartar's lips, Finger of birth-strangled babe Ditch-deliver'd by a drab, Make the gruel thick and slab: Add thereto a tiger's chaudron, For the ingredients of our cauldron.	Baby strangled at birth and left in a ditch.

Tartar's lips	Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf, Witches' mummy, maw and gulf Of the ravin'd salt-sea shark, Root of hemlock digg'd i' the dark, Liver of blaspheming Jew, Gall of goat, and slips of yew Silver'd in the moon's eclipse, Nose of Turk and Tartar's lips, Finger of birth-strangled babe Ditch-deliver'd by a drab, Make the gruel thick and slab: Add thereto a tiger's chaudron, For the ingredients of our cauldron.	Tartar's lips

a tiger's chaudron	Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf, Witches' mummy, maw and gulf Of the ravin'd salt-sea shark, Root of hemlock digg'd i' the dark, Liver of blaspheming Jew, Gall of goat, and slips of yew Silver'd in the moon's eclipse, Nose of Turk and Tartar's lips, Finger of birth-strangled babe Ditch-deliver'd by a drab, Make the gruel thick and slab: Add thereto a tiger's chaudron, For the ingredients of our cauldron.	A tiger's entrails

ingredients of our cauldron.	i' the dark, Liver of blaspheming Jew, Gall of goat, and slips of yew Silver'd in the moon's eclipse, Nose of Turk and Tartar's lips, Finger of birth-strangled babe Ditch-deliver'd by a drab, Make the gruel thick and slab: Add thereto a tiger's chaudron, For the ingredients of our cauldron.	What we're putting in our cauldron.

cauldron bubble	Double, double toil and trouble; Fire burn and cauldron bubble.	cauldron bubble

a baboon's blood	Cool it with a baboon's blood, Then the charm is firm and good.	baboon blood

Cool it with a baboon's blood, Then the charm is firm and good.	Cool it with a baboon's blood, Then the charm is firm and good.	Cool it with baboon's blood, then the spell will be strong and effective.

the cauldron sing	O well done! I commend your pains; And every one shall share i' the gains; And now about the cauldron sing, Live elves and fairies in a ring, Enchanting all that you put in.	Sing around the cauldron.

Live elves	O well done! I commend your pains; And every one shall share i' the gains; And now about the cauldron sing, Live elves and fairies in a ring, Enchanting all that you put in.	Live elves

elves and fairies in a ring, Enchanting all that you put in.	O well done! I commend your pains; And every one shall share i' the gains; And now about the cauldron sing, Live elves and fairies in a ring, Enchanting all that you put in.	Elves and fairies in a circle, casting a spell on everything you add.

pricking of my thumbs, Something wicked this way comes.	By the pricking of my thumbs, Something wicked this way comes. Open, locks, Whoever knocks!	My thumbs tingle; something evil is coming.

locks, Whoever knocks!	By the pricking of my thumbs, Something wicked this way comes. Open, locks, Whoever knocks!	Locks, open to whoever knocks!

deed without a name.	A deed without a name.	deed without a name.

the yesty waves	I conjure you, by that which you profess, Howe'er you come to know it, answer me: Though you untie the winds and let them fight Against the churches; though the yesty waves Confound and swallow navigation up; Though bladed corn be lodged and trees blown down; Though castles topple on their warders' heads; Though palaces and pyramids do slope Their heads to their foundations; though the treasure Of nature's germens tumble all together, Even till destruction sicken; answer me To what I ask you.	the foamy waves

their warders' heads	I conjure you, by that which you profess, Howe'er you come to know it, answer me: Though you untie the winds and let them fight Against the churches; though the yesty waves Confound and swallow navigation up; Though bladed corn be lodged and trees blown down; Though castles topple on their warders' heads; Though palaces and pyramids do slope Their heads to their foundations; though the treasure Of nature's germens tumble all together, Even till destruction sicken; answer me To what I ask you.	the heads of the guards

bladed corn	I conjure you, by that which you profess, Howe'er you come to know it, answer me: Though you untie the winds and let them fight Against the churches; though the yesty waves Confound and swallow navigation up; Though bladed corn be lodged and trees blown down; Though castles topple on their warders' heads; Though palaces and pyramids do slope Their heads to their foundations; though the treasure Of nature's germens tumble all together, Even till destruction sicken; answer me To what I ask you.	Grain that has grown into blades.

nature's germens tumble	I conjure you, by that which you profess, Howe'er you come to know it, answer me: Though you untie the winds and let them fight Against the churches; though the yesty waves Confound and swallow navigation up; Though bladed corn be lodged and trees blown down; Though castles topple on their warders' heads; Though palaces and pyramids do slope Their heads to their foundations; though the treasure Of nature's germens tumble all together, Even till destruction sicken; answer me To what I ask you.	Seeds of nature fall apart.

lodged and trees blown down; Though castles topple on their warders' heads; Though palaces and pyramids do slope Their heads to their foundations; though the treasure Of nature's germens tumble all together, Even till destruction sicken; answer me To what I ask you.	I conjure you, by that which you profess, Howe'er you come to know it, answer me: Though you untie the winds and let them fight Against the churches; though the yesty waves Confound and swallow navigation up; Though bladed corn be lodged and trees blown down; Though castles topple on their warders' heads; Though palaces and pyramids do slope Their heads to their foundations; though the treasure Of nature's germens tumble all together, Even till destruction sicken; answer me To what I ask you.	Flattened crops and fallen trees; even if castles fall on the heads of those guarding them; even if palaces and pyramids collapse completely; even if all of nature's seeds are destroyed, until destruction itself is tired; answer me what I ask.

Her nine farrow	Pour in sow's blood, that hath eaten Her nine farrow; grease that's sweaten From the murderer's gibbet throw Into the flame. Come, high or low; Thyself and office deftly show!	Her nine piglets.

sow's blood	Pour in sow's blood, that hath eaten Her nine farrow; grease that's sweaten From the murderer's gibbet throw Into the flame. Come, high or low; Thyself and office deftly show!	Pig's blood

the murderer's gibbet	Pour in sow's blood, that hath eaten Her nine farrow; grease that's sweaten From the murderer's gibbet throw Into the flame. Come, high or low; Thyself and office deftly show!	Where the murderer was hanged.

Pour in sow's blood, that hath eaten Her nine farrow; grease that's sweaten From the murderer's gibbet throw Into the flame.	Pour in sow's blood, that hath eaten Her nine farrow; grease that's sweaten From the murderer's gibbet throw Into the flame. Come, high or low; Thyself and office deftly show!	Pour in pig's blood from a mother pig that ate her nine piglets; throw grease that dripped from a murderer's hanging corpse into the fire.

thane of Fife.	Macbeth! beware Macduff; Beware the thane of Fife. Dismiss me.	Lord of Fife.

thou art, for thy good caution, thanks; Thou hast harp'd my fear aright: but one word more,—	Whate'er thou art, for thy good caution, thanks; Thou hast harp'd my fear aright: but one word more,—	Whatever you are, thank you for your helpful warning. You've hit my fear exactly. Just one more question—

potent than the first.	He will not be commanded: here's another, More potent than the first.	more powerful than the first.

power of man, for none of woman born Shall harm Macbeth.	Be bloody, bold, and resolute; laugh to scorn The power of man, for none of woman born Shall harm Macbeth.	No one born from a woman can hurt Macbeth.

Macduff: what need I fear of thee?	Then live, Macduff: what need I fear of thee? But yet I'll make assurance double sure, And take a bond of fate: thou shalt not live; That I may tell pale-hearted fear it lies, And sleep in spite of thunder.	Macduff, why should I be afraid of you?

pale-hearted fear	Then live, Macduff: what need I fear of thee? But yet I'll make assurance double sure, And take a bond of fate: thou shalt not live; That I may tell pale-hearted fear it lies, And sleep in spite of thunder. What is this That rises like the issue of a king, And wears upon his baby-brow the round And top of sovereignty?	cowardly fear

spite of thunder.	Then live, Macduff: what need I fear of thee? But yet I'll make assurance double sure, And take a bond of fate: thou shalt not live; That I may tell pale-hearted fear it lies, And sleep in spite of thunder. What is this That rises like the issue of a king, And wears upon his baby-brow the round And top of sovereignty?	despite thunder.

top of sovereignty?	But yet I'll make assurance double sure, And take a bond of fate: thou shalt not live; That I may tell pale-hearted fear it lies, And sleep in spite of thunder. What is this That rises like the issue of a king, And wears upon his baby-brow the round And top of sovereignty?	the crown?

his baby-brow	But yet I'll make assurance double sure, And take a bond of fate: thou shalt not live; That I may tell pale-hearted fear it lies, And sleep in spite of thunder. What is this That rises like the issue of a king, And wears upon his baby-brow the round And top of sovereignty?	his forehead as a baby

high Dunsinane hill	Be lion-mettled, proud; and take no care Who chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are: Macbeth shall never vanquish'd be until Great Birnam wood to high Dunsinane hill Shall come against him.	high Dunsinane hill

chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are: Macbeth shall never vanquish'd be until Great Birnam wood to high Dunsinane hill Shall come against him.	Be lion-mettled, proud; and take no care Who chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are: Macbeth shall never vanquish'd be until Great Birnam wood to high Dunsinane hill Shall come against him.	Don't worry about who gets angry, who gets upset, or where the plotters are. Macbeth will never be defeated until the Great Birnam Wood moves to Dunsinane Hill to fight him.

Great Birnam wood	Be lion-mettled, proud; and take no care Who chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are: Macbeth shall never vanquish'd be until Great Birnam wood to high Dunsinane hill Shall come against him.	Great Birnam Wood

bid the tree Unfix his earth-bound root?	That will never be Who can impress the forest, bid the tree Unfix his earth-bound root? Sweet bodements!	tell the tree to uproot itself from the ground?

Sweet bodements	That will never be Who can impress the forest, bid the tree Unfix his earth-bound root? Sweet bodements! good!	Sweet omens.

rise, and our high-placed Macbeth Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath To time and mortal custom.	good! Rebellion's head, rise never till the wood Of Birnam rise, and our high-placed Macbeth Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath To time and mortal custom. Yet my heart Throbs to know one thing: tell me, if your art Can tell so much: shall Banquo's issue ever Reign in this kingdom?	Macbeth will live out his natural lifespan and die of old age.

mortal custom	good! Rebellion's head, rise never till the wood Of Birnam rise, and our high-placed Macbeth Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath To time and mortal custom. Yet my heart Throbs to know one thing: tell me, if your art Can tell so much: shall Banquo's issue ever Reign in this kingdom?	death

Rebellion's head	good! Rebellion's head, rise never till the wood Of Birnam rise, and our high-placed Macbeth Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath To time and mortal custom. Yet my heart Throbs to know one thing: tell me, if your art Can tell so much: shall Banquo's issue ever Reign in this kingdom?	Rebellion will never rise up

our high-placed Macbeth	good! Rebellion's head, rise never till the wood Of Birnam rise, and our high-placed Macbeth Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath To time and mortal custom. Yet my heart Throbs to know one thing: tell me, if your art Can tell so much: shall Banquo's issue ever Reign in this kingdom?	Macbeth, our king

Banquo's issue	Rebellion's head, rise never till the wood Of Birnam rise, and our high-placed Macbeth Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath To time and mortal custom. Yet my heart Throbs to know one thing: tell me, if your art Can tell so much: shall Banquo's issue ever Reign in this kingdom?	Banquo's descendants

Reign in this kingdom?	Rebellion's head, rise never till the wood Of Birnam rise, and our high-placed Macbeth Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath To time and mortal custom. Yet my heart Throbs to know one thing: tell me, if your art Can tell so much: shall Banquo's issue ever Reign in this kingdom?	Will Banquo's descendants ever rule Scotland?

an eternal curse	I will be satisfied: deny me this, And an eternal curse fall on you! Let me know.	a never-ending curse

Come like shadows, so depart!	Show his eyes, and grieve his heart; Come like shadows, so depart!	Appear like ghosts, then disappear quickly!

spirit of Banquo: down!	Thou art too like the spirit of Banquo: down! Thy crown does sear mine eye-balls.	Banquo's ghost: get out of my sight!

other gold-bound brow	Thy crown does sear mine eye-balls. And thy hair, Thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first. A third is like the former.	another head crowned with gold

Filthy hags	A third is like the former. Filthy hags! Why do you show me this?	Disgusting old women!

some I see That two-fold balls and treble scepters carry: Horrible sight!	A seventh! I'll see no more: And yet the eighth appears, who bears a glass Which shows me many more; and some I see That two-fold balls and treble scepters carry: Horrible sight! Now, I see, 'tis true; For the blood-bolter'd Banquo smiles upon me, And points at them for his.	I see some who carry double globes and triple scepters. Horrible sight!

treble scepters	A seventh! I'll see no more: And yet the eighth appears, who bears a glass Which shows me many more; and some I see That two-fold balls and treble scepters carry: Horrible sight! Now, I see, 'tis true; For the blood-bolter'd Banquo smiles upon me, And points at them for his.	Triple scepters

the blood-bolter'd Banquo	I'll see no more: And yet the eighth appears, who bears a glass Which shows me many more; and some I see That two-fold balls and treble scepters carry: Horrible sight! Now, I see, 'tis true; For the blood-bolter'd Banquo smiles upon me, And points at them for his. What, is this so?	bloody-haired Banquo

cheer we up his sprites, And show the best of our delights: I'll charm the air to give a sound, While you perform your antic round: That this great king may kindly say, Our duties did his welcome pay.	Ay, sir, all this is so: but why Stands Macbeth thus amazedly? Come, sisters, cheer we up his sprites, And show the best of our delights: I'll charm the air to give a sound, While you perform your antic round: That this great king may kindly say, Our duties did his welcome pay.	Let's lift his spirits and show him our greatest magic. I'll fill the air with music while you dance your strange dance, so this great king will say we've given him a proper welcome.

your antic round	Ay, sir, all this is so: but why Stands Macbeth thus amazedly? Come, sisters, cheer we up his sprites, And show the best of our delights: I'll charm the air to give a sound, While you perform your antic round: That this great king may kindly say, Our duties did his welcome pay.	your strange dance

accursed in the calendar!	Gone? Let this pernicious hour Stand aye accursed in the calendar! Come in, without there!	Cursed forever!

your grace's will	What's your grace's will?	What do you want me to do?

whereon they ride; And damn'd all those that trust them!	Infected be the air whereon they ride; And damn'd all those that trust them! I did hear The galloping of horse: who was't came by?	May the air they travel through be infected, and may all who trust them be damned!

the air whereon	Infected be the air whereon they ride; And damn'd all those that trust them! I did hear The galloping of horse: who was't came by?	the air on which

galloping of horse: who was't came by?	Infected be the air whereon they ride; And damn'd all those that trust them! I did hear The galloping of horse: who was't came by?	The galloping of horses: who just rode past?

fled to England.	'Tis two or three, my lord, that bring you word Macduff is fled to England.	Ran away to England.

Fled to England!	Fled to England!	Fled to England!

be The firstlings of my hand.	Time, thou anticipatest my dread exploits: The flighty purpose never is o'ertook Unless the deed go with it; from this moment The very firstlings of my heart shall be The firstlings of my hand. And even now, To crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and done: The castle of Macduff I will surprise; Seize upon Fife; give to the edge o' the sword	will be done immediately.

my dread exploits	Time, thou anticipatest my dread exploits: The flighty purpose never is o'ertook Unless the deed go with it; from this moment The very firstlings of my heart shall be The firstlings of my hand. And even now, To crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and done: The castle of Macduff I will surprise; Seize upon Fife; give to the edge o' the sword	my terrible plans

The flighty purpose	Time, thou anticipatest my dread exploits: The flighty purpose never is o'ertook Unless the deed go with it; from this moment The very firstlings of my heart shall be The firstlings of my hand. And even now, To crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and done: The castle of Macduff I will surprise; Seize upon Fife; give to the edge o' the sword	The fleeting intention.

The very firstlings	Time, thou anticipatest my dread exploits: The flighty purpose never is o'ertook Unless the deed go with it; from this moment The very firstlings of my heart shall be The firstlings of my hand. And even now, To crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and done: The castle of Macduff I will surprise; Seize upon Fife; give to the edge o' the sword	Whatever comes to mind first.

crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and done: The castle of Macduff I will surprise; Seize upon Fife; give to the edge o' the sword	Time, thou anticipatest my dread exploits: The flighty purpose never is o'ertook Unless the deed go with it; from this moment The very firstlings of my heart shall be The firstlings of my hand. And even now, To crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and done: The castle of Macduff I will surprise; Seize upon Fife; give to the edge o' the sword His wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls That trace him in his line.	I'll turn my thoughts into actions immediately: I will attack Macduff's castle; seize Fife; and kill

trace him in his line.	And even now, To crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and done: The castle of Macduff I will surprise; Seize upon Fife; give to the edge o' the sword His wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls That trace him in his line. No boasting like a fool; This deed I'll do before this purpose cool.	are related to him.

all unfortunate souls	And even now, To crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and done: The castle of Macduff I will surprise; Seize upon Fife; give to the edge o' the sword His wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls That trace him in his line. No boasting like a fool; This deed I'll do before this purpose cool.	everyone else connected to him

boasting like a fool; This deed I'll do before this purpose cool.	His wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls That trace him in his line. No boasting like a fool; This deed I'll do before this purpose cool. But no more sights!—Where are these gentlemen?	I won't boast like an idiot; I'll do this deed before I lose my nerve.

no more sights!—Where	No boasting like a fool; This deed I'll do before this purpose cool. But no more sights!—Where are these gentlemen? Come, bring me where they are.	No more distractions! Where are they?

patience, madam.	You must have patience, madam.	Patience, madam.

make us traitors.	He had none: His flight was madness: when our actions do not, Our fears do make us traitors.	make us act like traitors.

the poor wren	to leave his wife, to leave his babes, His mansion and his titles in a place From whence himself does fly? He loves us not; He wants the natural touch: for the poor wren, The most diminutive of birds, will fight, Her young ones in her nest, against the owl. All is the fear and nothing is the love; As little is the wisdom, where the flight So runs against all reason.	even the tiny wren

ones in her nest, against the owl.	to leave his wife, to leave his babes, His mansion and his titles in a place From whence himself does fly? He loves us not; He wants the natural touch: for the poor wren, The most diminutive of birds, will fight, Her young ones in her nest, against the owl. All is the fear and nothing is the love; As little is the wisdom, where the flight So runs against all reason.	her young in their nest, even against an owl.

wisdom, where the flight So runs against all reason.	He loves us not; He wants the natural touch: for the poor wren, The most diminutive of birds, will fight, Her young ones in her nest, against the owl. All is the fear and nothing is the love; As little is the wisdom, where the flight So runs against all reason.	where acting goes against all common sense.

pray you, school yourself: but for your husband, He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows The fits o' the season.	My dearest coz, I pray you, school yourself: but for your husband, He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows The fits o' the season. I dare not speak much further; But cruel are the times, when we are traitors And do not know ourselves, when we hold rumour From what we fear, yet know not what we fear, But float upon a wild and violent sea Each way and move.	Please, control yourself. As for your husband, he is noble, wise, sensible, and understands the times best.

a wild and violent sea	My dearest coz, I pray you, school yourself: but for your husband, He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows The fits o' the season. I dare not speak much further; But cruel are the times, when we are traitors And do not know ourselves, when we hold rumour From what we fear, yet know not what we fear, But float upon a wild and violent sea Each way and move. I take my leave of you: Shall not be long	a chaotic and turbulent situation

times, when we are traitors And do not know ourselves, when we hold rumour From what we fear, yet know not what we fear, But float upon a wild and violent sea Each way and move.	My dearest coz, I pray you, school yourself: but for your husband, He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows The fits o' the season. I dare not speak much further; But cruel are the times, when we are traitors And do not know ourselves, when we hold rumour From what we fear, yet know not what we fear, But float upon a wild and violent sea Each way and move. I take my leave of you: Shall not be long	These are times when we betray ourselves without even realizing it, when we believe rumors based on our fears, yet we don't even know what we're truly afraid of. We're just tossed around on a wild and violent sea, going every which way.

Things at the worst will cease, or else climb upward To what they were before.	I take my leave of you: Shall not be long but I'll be here again: Things at the worst will cease, or else climb upward To what they were before. My pretty cousin, Blessing upon you!	Things will either stop being so bad, or they'll get better and return to how they used to be.

Blessing upon you!	but I'll be here again: Things at the worst will cease, or else climb upward To what they were before. My pretty cousin, Blessing upon you!	Bless you!

My pretty cousin	but I'll be here again: Things at the worst will cease, or else climb upward To what they were before. My pretty cousin, Blessing upon you!	My pretty cousin

take my leave at once.	I am so much a fool, should I stay longer, It would be my disgrace and your discomfort: I take my leave at once.	I'm leaving immediately.

Sirrah, your father's dead; And what will you do now?	Sirrah, your father's dead; And what will you do now? How will you live?	Hey, your father's dead. What are you going to do now?

speak'st with all thy wit: and yet, i' faith, With wit enough for thee.	Thou speak'st with all thy wit: and yet, i' faith, With wit enough for thee.	You're using all the wit you have, and honestly, that's about all you're capable of.

traitor, mother?	Was my father a traitor, mother?	Traitor, mother?

one that swears and lies.	Why, one that swears and lies.	Someone who swears and lies.

traitors that do so?	And be all traitors that do so?	Traitors if they do that?

one that does so is a traitor, and must be hanged.	Every one that does so is a traitor, and must be hanged.	Anyone who does that is a traitor and will be hanged.

they all be hanged that swear and lie?	And must they all be hanged that swear and lie?	Should everyone who swears and lies be hanged?

liars and swearers enow to beat the honest men and hang up them.	Then the liars and swearers are fools, for there are liars and swearers enow to beat the honest men and hang up them.	There are enough liars and people who break oaths to defeat honest men and have them hanged.

sign that I should quickly have a new father.	If he were dead, you'ld weep for him: if you would not, it were a good sign that I should quickly have a new father.	It would mean I'd have a new father soon.

Poor prattler	Poor prattler, how thou talk'st!	Poor chatterbox.

prattler, how thou talk'st!	Poor prattler, how thou talk'st!	Chatterbox, how you talk!

state of honour I am perfect.	Bless you, fair dame! I am not to you known, Though in your state of honour I am perfect. I doubt some danger does approach you nearly: If you will take a homely man's advice, Be not found here; hence, with your little ones.	I know everything about your high social standing.

found here; hence, with your little ones.	I am not to you known, Though in your state of honour I am perfect. I doubt some danger does approach you nearly: If you will take a homely man's advice, Be not found here; hence, with your little ones. To fright you thus, methinks, I am too savage; To do worse to you were fell cruelty, Which is too nigh your person.	Don't be found here; leave with your children.

a homely man's advice	I am not to you known, Though in your state of honour I am perfect. I doubt some danger does approach you nearly: If you will take a homely man's advice, Be not found here; hence, with your little ones. To fright you thus, methinks, I am too savage; To do worse to you were fell cruelty, Which is too nigh your person.	a regular guy's advice

am too savage; To do worse to you were fell cruelty, Which is too nigh your person.	I doubt some danger does approach you nearly: If you will take a homely man's advice, Be not found here; hence, with your little ones. To fright you thus, methinks, I am too savage; To do worse to you were fell cruelty, Which is too nigh your person. Heaven preserve you!	I'm too harsh to scare you like this. To do anything worse would be extreme cruelty, and that's too close to happening to you.

this earthly world	I have done no harm. But I remember now I am in this earthly world; where to do harm Is often laudable, to do good sometime Accounted dangerous folly: why then, alas, Do I put up that womanly defence, To say I have done no harm? What are these faces?	this world

that womanly defence	I have done no harm. But I remember now I am in this earthly world; where to do harm Is often laudable, to do good sometime Accounted dangerous folly: why then, alas, Do I put up that womanly defence, To say I have done no harm? What are these faces?	that weak excuse

put up that womanly defence, To say I have done no harm?	I have done no harm. But I remember now I am in this earthly world; where to do harm Is often laudable, to do good sometime Accounted dangerous folly: why then, alas, Do I put up that womanly defence, To say I have done no harm? What are these faces?	make that weak, womanly excuse, to claim I've done nothing wrong?

hope, in no place so unsanctified Where such as thou mayst find him.	I hope, in no place so unsanctified Where such as thou mayst find him.	I hope he's in a place too holy for someone like you to find him.

thou shag-hair'd villain!	Thou liest, thou shag-hair'd villain!	You hairy, evil scoundrel!

shag-hair'd villain	Thou liest, thou shag-hair'd villain!	hairy, evil person

fry of treachery!	What, you egg! Young fry of treachery!	Son of a traitor!

Young fry	What, you egg! Young fry of treachery!	Young one

some desolate shade	Let us seek out some desolate shade, and there Weep our sad bosoms empty.	some lonely, shady spot

Weep our sad bosoms empty.	Let us seek out some desolate shade, and there Weep our sad bosoms empty.	Let's cry until we have no more tears.

our sad bosoms	Let us seek out some desolate shade, and there Weep our sad bosoms empty.	our sad hearts

felt with Scotland and yell'd out Like syllable of dolour.	Let us rather Hold fast the mortal sword, and like good men Bestride our down-fall'n birthdom: each new morn New widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds As if it felt with Scotland and yell'd out Like syllable of dolour.	Felt Scotland's pain and screamed out in matching grief.

each new morn New widows	Let us rather Hold fast the mortal sword, and like good men Bestride our down-fall'n birthdom: each new morn New widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds As if it felt with Scotland and yell'd out Like syllable of dolour.	Every new morning, new widows...

our down-fall'n birthdom	Let us rather Hold fast the mortal sword, and like good men Bestride our down-fall'n birthdom: each new morn New widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds As if it felt with Scotland and yell'd out Like syllable of dolour.	our fallen homeland

the mortal sword	Let us rather Hold fast the mortal sword, and like good men Bestride our down-fall'n birthdom: each new morn New widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds As if it felt with Scotland and yell'd out Like syllable of dolour.	the deadly sword

new orphans	Let us rather Hold fast the mortal sword, and like good men Bestride our down-fall'n birthdom: each new morn New widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds As if it felt with Scotland and yell'd out Like syllable of dolour.	new orphans

believe, and what I can redress, As I shall find the time to friend, I will.	What I believe I'll wail, What know believe, and what I can redress, As I shall find the time to friend, I will. What you have spoke, it may be so perchance.	I'll act on what I believe and fix what I can, when I have the time.

be so perchance.	What I believe I'll wail, What know believe, and what I can redress, As I shall find the time to friend, I will. What you have spoke, it may be so perchance. This tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues, Was once thought honest: you have loved him well.	It might be true.

tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues, Was once thought honest: you have loved him well.	What you have spoke, it may be so perchance. This tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues, Was once thought honest: you have loved him well. He hath not touch'd you yet.	That tyrant, whose very name hurts to say, was once considered honest. You used to love him.

offer up a weak poor innocent lamb To appease an angry god.	He hath not touch'd you yet. I am young; but something You may deserve of him through me, and wisdom To offer up a weak poor innocent lamb To appease an angry god.	Sacrifice a helpless, innocent victim to calm down an angry god.

a weak poor innocent lamb	He hath not touch'd you yet. I am young; but something You may deserve of him through me, and wisdom To offer up a weak poor innocent lamb To appease an angry god.	a helpless, innocent victim

recoil In an imperial charge.	But Macbeth is. A good and virtuous nature may recoil In an imperial charge. But I shall crave your pardon; That which you are my thoughts cannot transpose: Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell; Though all things foul would wear the brows of grace, Yet grace must still look so.	shrink back from a royal command.

A good and virtuous nature	But Macbeth is. A good and virtuous nature may recoil In an imperial charge. But I shall crave your pardon; That which you are my thoughts cannot transpose: Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell; Though all things foul would wear the brows of grace, Yet grace must still look so.	A good and moral person

That which you are my thoughts cannot transpose: Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell; Though all things foul would wear the brows of grace, Yet grace must still look so.	A good and virtuous nature may recoil In an imperial charge. But I shall crave your pardon; That which you are my thoughts cannot transpose: Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell; Though all things foul would wear the brows of grace, Yet grace must still look so.	My thoughts cannot change what you are: angels are still beautiful, even though the most beautiful one fell; even if evil things try to appear graceful, grace will still look like grace.

Perchance even there where I did find my doubts.	Perchance even there where I did find my doubts. Why in that rawness left you wife and child, Those precious motives, those strong knots of love, Without leave-taking?	Maybe even in the place where I found my doubts.

those strong knots	Perchance even there where I did find my doubts. Why in that rawness left you wife and child, Those precious motives, those strong knots of love, Without leave-taking? I pray you, Let not my jealousies be your dishonours, But mine own safeties.	strong bonds

Why in that rawness left you wife and child, Those precious motives, those strong knots of love, Without leave-taking?	Perchance even there where I did find my doubts. Why in that rawness left you wife and child, Those precious motives, those strong knots of love, Without leave-taking? I pray you, Let not my jealousies be your dishonours, But mine own safeties.	Why did you so suddenly leave your wife and child, those reasons to stay, those strong bonds of love, without saying goodbye?

Those precious motives	Perchance even there where I did find my doubts. Why in that rawness left you wife and child, Those precious motives, those strong knots of love, Without leave-taking? I pray you, Let not my jealousies be your dishonours, But mine own safeties.	Those valuable reasons.

be rightly just, Whatever I shall think.	I pray you, Let not my jealousies be your dishonours, But mine own safeties. You may be rightly just, Whatever I shall think.	You can be completely innocent, no matter what I think.

Bleed, bleed, poor country	Bleed, bleed, poor country! Great tyranny!	Suffer, suffer, poor country.

Great tyranny	Bleed, bleed, poor country! Great tyranny! lay thou thy basis sure, For goodness dare not cheque thee: wear thou thy wrongs; The title is affeer'd!	Great oppression!

cheque thee: wear thou thy wrongs; The title is affeer'd!	Great tyranny! lay thou thy basis sure, For goodness dare not cheque thee: wear thou thy wrongs; The title is affeer'd! Fare thee well, lord: I would not be the villain that thou think'st For the whole space that's in the tyrant's grasp, And the rich East to boot.	stop you; keep your ill-gotten gains; your right to them is confirmed!

be the villain that thou think'st For the whole space that's in the tyrant's grasp, And the rich East to boot.	lay thou thy basis sure, For goodness dare not cheque thee: wear thou thy wrongs; The title is affeer'd! Fare thee well, lord: I would not be the villain that thou think'st For the whole space that's in the tyrant's grasp, And the rich East to boot.	be the villain you believe me to be, even for all the land the tyrant controls, and all the riches of the East on top of that.

the tyrant's grasp	lay thou thy basis sure, For goodness dare not cheque thee: wear thou thy wrongs; The title is affeer'd! Fare thee well, lord: I would not be the villain that thou think'st For the whole space that's in the tyrant's grasp, And the rich East to boot.	what the tyrant controls

gracious England	Be not offended: I speak not as in absolute fear of you. I think our country sinks beneath the yoke; It weeps, it bleeds; and each new day a gash Is added to her wounds: I think withal There would be hands uplifted in my right; And here from gracious England have I offer Of goodly thousands: but, for all this, When I shall tread upon the tyrant's head, Or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country Shall have more vices than it had before, More suffer and more sundry ways than ever, By him that shall succeed.	kind England

the tyrant's head	Be not offended: I speak not as in absolute fear of you. I think our country sinks beneath the yoke; It weeps, it bleeds; and each new day a gash Is added to her wounds: I think withal There would be hands uplifted in my right; And here from gracious England have I offer Of goodly thousands: but, for all this, When I shall tread upon the tyrant's head, Or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country Shall have more vices than it had before, More suffer and more sundry ways than ever, By him that shall succeed.	the head of the tyrant

goodly thousands	Be not offended: I speak not as in absolute fear of you. I think our country sinks beneath the yoke; It weeps, it bleeds; and each new day a gash Is added to her wounds: I think withal There would be hands uplifted in my right; And here from gracious England have I offer Of goodly thousands: but, for all this, When I shall tread upon the tyrant's head, Or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country Shall have more vices than it had before, More suffer and more sundry ways than ever, By him that shall succeed.	A considerable number of soldiers (thousands).

more sundry ways	Be not offended: I speak not as in absolute fear of you. I think our country sinks beneath the yoke; It weeps, it bleeds; and each new day a gash Is added to her wounds: I think withal There would be hands uplifted in my right; And here from gracious England have I offer Of goodly thousands: but, for all this, When I shall tread upon the tyrant's head, Or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country Shall have more vices than it had before, More suffer and more sundry ways than ever, By him that shall succeed.	more varied ways

offer Of goodly thousands: but, for all this, When I shall tread upon the tyrant's head, Or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country Shall have more vices than it had before, More suffer and more sundry ways than ever, By him that shall succeed.	Be not offended: I speak not as in absolute fear of you. I think our country sinks beneath the yoke; It weeps, it bleeds; and each new day a gash Is added to her wounds: I think withal There would be hands uplifted in my right; And here from gracious England have I offer Of goodly thousands: but, for all this, When I shall tread upon the tyrant's head, Or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country Shall have more vices than it had before, More suffer and more sundry ways than ever, By him that shall succeed.	I have been offered a great many soldiers. But even if I defeat the tyrant, my country will still be more corrupt than before. It will suffer even more in different ways under the new leader.

black Macbeth	It is myself I mean: in whom I know All the particulars of vice so grafted That, when they shall be open'd, black Macbeth Will seem as pure as snow, and the poor state Esteem him as a lamb, being compared With my confineless harms.	Evil Macbeth

seem as pure as snow, and the poor state Esteem him as a lamb, being compared With my confineless harms.	It is myself I mean: in whom I know All the particulars of vice so grafted That, when they shall be open'd, black Macbeth Will seem as pure as snow, and the poor state Esteem him as a lamb, being compared With my confineless harms.	Will seem innocent as snow, and the country will think Macbeth was gentle like a lamb compared to the limitless evil I'm capable of.

horrid hell	Not in the legions Of horrid hell can come a devil more damn'd In evils to top Macbeth.	terrible hell

legions Of horrid hell can come a devil more damn'd	Not in the legions Of horrid hell can come a devil more damn'd In evils to top Macbeth.	No devil from the horrible depths of hell is more damned.

top Macbeth	Not in the legions Of horrid hell can come a devil more damn'd In evils to top Macbeth.	be worse than Macbeth

In evils to top Macbeth.	Not in the legions Of horrid hell can come a devil more damn'd In evils to top Macbeth.	More evil than Macbeth.

better Macbeth	I grant him bloody, Luxurious, avaricious, false, deceitful, Sudden, malicious, smacking of every sin That has a name: but there's no bottom, none, In my voluptuousness: your wives, your daughters, Your matrons and your maids, could not fill up The cistern of my lust, and my desire All continent impediments would o'erbear That did oppose my will: better Macbeth Than such an one to reign.	Macbeth is better than such a one to be king.

All continent impediments	I grant him bloody, Luxurious, avaricious, false, deceitful, Sudden, malicious, smacking of every sin That has a name: but there's no bottom, none, In my voluptuousness: your wives, your daughters, Your matrons and your maids, could not fill up The cistern of my lust, and my desire All continent impediments would o'erbear That did oppose my will: better Macbeth Than such an one to reign.	Every restraint of self-control

sin That has a name: but there's no bottom, none, In my voluptuousness: your wives, your daughters, Your matrons and your maids, could not fill up The cistern of my lust, and my desire All continent impediments would o'erbear That did oppose my will: better Macbeth Than such an one to reign.	I grant him bloody, Luxurious, avaricious, false, deceitful, Sudden, malicious, smacking of every sin That has a name: but there's no bottom, none, In my voluptuousness: your wives, your daughters, Your matrons and your maids, could not fill up The cistern of my lust, and my desire All continent impediments would o'erbear That did oppose my will: better Macbeth Than such an one to reign.	every sin you can think of. But my lust is endless, insatiable. All the women in the country couldn't satisfy me. I'd overcome any obstacle to get what I want. Macbeth would be a better king than me.

Boundless intemperance	Boundless intemperance In nature is a tyranny; it hath been The untimely emptying of the happy throne And fall of many kings. But fear not yet To take upon you what is yours: you may Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty, And yet seem cold, the time you may so hoodwink.	Unlimited excess.

The untimely emptying	Boundless intemperance In nature is a tyranny; it hath been The untimely emptying of the happy throne And fall of many kings. But fear not yet To take upon you what is yours: you may Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty, And yet seem cold, the time you may so hoodwink.	Premature removal

the happy throne	Boundless intemperance In nature is a tyranny; it hath been The untimely emptying of the happy throne And fall of many kings. But fear not yet To take upon you what is yours: you may Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty, And yet seem cold, the time you may so hoodwink.	A joyful reign.

a spacious plenty	Boundless intemperance In nature is a tyranny; it hath been The untimely emptying of the happy throne And fall of many kings. But fear not yet To take upon you what is yours: you may Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty, And yet seem cold, the time you may so hoodwink. We have willing dames enough: there cannot be That vulture in you, to devour so many As will to greatness dedicate themselves, Finding it so inclined.	plenty of room

time you may so hoodwink.	Boundless intemperance In nature is a tyranny; it hath been The untimely emptying of the happy throne And fall of many kings. But fear not yet To take upon you what is yours: you may Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty, And yet seem cold, the time you may so hoodwink. We have willing dames enough: there cannot be That vulture in you, to devour so many As will to greatness dedicate themselves, Finding it so inclined.	you can deceive people for a while.

be That vulture in you, to devour so many As will to greatness dedicate themselves, Finding it so inclined.	But fear not yet To take upon you what is yours: you may Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty, And yet seem cold, the time you may so hoodwink. We have willing dames enough: there cannot be That vulture in you, to devour so many As will to greatness dedicate themselves, Finding it so inclined.	You can't be so greedy as to take advantage of all the women who are willing to give themselves to someone powerful like you, because they think you're interested.

such A stanchless avarice	With this there grows In my most ill-composed affection such A stanchless avarice that, were I king, I should cut off the nobles for their lands, Desire his jewels and this other's house: And my more-having would be as a sauce To make me hunger more; that I should forge Quarrels unjust against the good and loyal, Destroying them for wealth.	such an unquenchable greed

my most ill-composed affection	With this there grows In my most ill-composed affection such A stanchless avarice that, were I king, I should cut off the nobles for their lands, Desire his jewels and this other's house: And my more-having would be as a sauce To make me hunger more; that I should forge Quarrels unjust against the good and loyal, Destroying them for wealth.	my messed-up desires

this other's house	With this there grows In my most ill-composed affection such A stanchless avarice that, were I king, I should cut off the nobles for their lands, Desire his jewels and this other's house: And my more-having would be as a sauce To make me hunger more; that I should forge Quarrels unjust against the good and loyal, Destroying them for wealth.	someone else's house

grows In my most ill-composed affection such A stanchless avarice that, were I king, I should cut off the nobles for their lands, Desire his jewels and this other's house:	With this there grows In my most ill-composed affection such A stanchless avarice that, were I king, I should cut off the nobles for their lands, Desire his jewels and this other's house: And my more-having would be as a sauce To make me hunger more; that I should forge Quarrels unjust against the good and loyal, Destroying them for wealth.	My messed-up feelings are creating such a bottomless greed that, if I were king, I'd kill the nobles for their land, and crave one person's jewels and another's house.

our slain kings	This avarice Sticks deeper, grows with more pernicious root Than summer-seeming lust, and it hath been The sword of our slain kings: yet do not fear; Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will. Of your mere own: all these are portable, With other graces weigh'd.	kings who have been killed

sword of our slain kings: yet do not fear; Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will.	This avarice Sticks deeper, grows with more pernicious root Than summer-seeming lust, and it hath been The sword of our slain kings: yet do not fear; Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will. Of your mere own: all these are portable, With other graces weigh'd.	...the sword that killed our kings. But don't worry; Scotland has riches enough to satisfy your desires.

summer-seeming lust	This avarice Sticks deeper, grows with more pernicious root Than summer-seeming lust, and it hath been The sword of our slain kings: yet do not fear; Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will. Of your mere own: all these are portable, With other graces weigh'd.	lust that seems temporary

more pernicious root	This avarice Sticks deeper, grows with more pernicious root Than summer-seeming lust, and it hath been The sword of our slain kings: yet do not fear; Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will. Of your mere own: all these are portable, With other graces weigh'd.	more destructive root

other graces weigh'd	This avarice Sticks deeper, grows with more pernicious root Than summer-seeming lust, and it hath been The sword of our slain kings: yet do not fear; Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will. Of your mere own: all these are portable, With other graces weigh'd.	compared to other good qualities.

are portable, With other graces weigh'd.	This avarice Sticks deeper, grows with more pernicious root Than summer-seeming lust, and it hath been The sword of our slain kings: yet do not fear; Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will. Of your mere own: all these are portable, With other graces weigh'd.	are manageable, when compared to your other good qualities.

relish of them, but abound In the division of each several crime,	But I have none: the king-becoming graces, As justice, verity, temperance, stableness, Bounty, perseverance, mercy, lowliness, Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude, I have no relish of them, but abound In the division of each several crime, Acting it many ways.	I don't enjoy those qualities, but I'm an expert at every kind of crime,

Pour the sweet milk of concord into hell, Uproar the universal peace, confound All unity on earth.	Acting it many ways. Nay, had I power, I should Pour the sweet milk of concord into hell, Uproar the universal peace, confound All unity on earth.	I would bring peace to hell, disrupt the peace everywhere, and destroy all unity on earth.

Uproar the universal peace	Acting it many ways. Nay, had I power, I should Pour the sweet milk of concord into hell, Uproar the universal peace, confound All unity on earth.	Disrupt world peace.

an untitled tyrant	No, not to live. O nation miserable, With an untitled tyrant bloody-scepter'd, When shalt thou see thy wholesome days again, Since that the truest issue of thy throne By his own interdiction stands accursed, And does blaspheme his breed? Thy royal father Was a most sainted king: the queen that bore thee, Oftener upon her knees than on her feet, Died every day she lived.	a tyrant with no right to the throne

his own interdiction	No, not to live. O nation miserable, With an untitled tyrant bloody-scepter'd, When shalt thou see thy wholesome days again, Since that the truest issue of thy throne By his own interdiction stands accursed, And does blaspheme his breed? Thy royal father Was a most sainted king: the queen that bore thee, Oftener upon her knees than on her feet, Died every day she lived.	his own ban

issue of thy throne By his own interdiction stands accursed, And does blaspheme his breed?	No, not to live. O nation miserable, With an untitled tyrant bloody-scepter'd, When shalt thou see thy wholesome days again, Since that the truest issue of thy throne By his own interdiction stands accursed, And does blaspheme his breed? Thy royal father Was a most sainted king: the queen that bore thee, Oftener upon her knees than on her feet, Died every day she lived.	The heir to your throne is cursed by his own actions and insults his own family?

thy wholesome days	No, not to live. O nation miserable, With an untitled tyrant bloody-scepter'd, When shalt thou see thy wholesome days again, Since that the truest issue of thy throne By his own interdiction stands accursed, And does blaspheme his breed? Thy royal father Was a most sainted king: the queen that bore thee, Oftener upon her knees than on her feet, Died every day she lived.	your healthy times

queen that bore thee, Oftener upon her knees than on her feet, Died every day she lived.	O nation miserable, With an untitled tyrant bloody-scepter'd, When shalt thou see thy wholesome days again, Since that the truest issue of thy throne By his own interdiction stands accursed, And does blaspheme his breed? Thy royal father Was a most sainted king: the queen that bore thee, Oftener upon her knees than on her feet, Died every day she lived. Fare thee well!	The queen who gave birth to you spent more time praying than walking, and lived each day as if she were dying.

a most sainted king	O nation miserable, With an untitled tyrant bloody-scepter'd, When shalt thou see thy wholesome days again, Since that the truest issue of thy throne By his own interdiction stands accursed, And does blaspheme his breed? Thy royal father Was a most sainted king: the queen that bore thee, Oftener upon her knees than on her feet, Died every day she lived. Fare thee well!	a very holy king

Have banish'd me from Scotland.	Fare thee well! These evils thou repeat'st upon thyself Have banish'd me from Scotland. O my breast, Thy hope ends here!	Have forced me to leave Scotland.

the black scruples	Macduff, this noble passion, Child of integrity, hath from my soul Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts To thy good truth and honour. Devilish Macbeth By many of these trains hath sought to win me Into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me From over-credulous haste: but God above Deal between thee and me!	The dark doubts.

reconciled my thoughts To thy good truth and honour.	Macduff, this noble passion, Child of integrity, hath from my soul Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts To thy good truth and honour. Devilish Macbeth By many of these trains hath sought to win me Into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me From over-credulous haste: but God above Deal between thee and me!	made me believe in your honesty and honor.

win me Into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me From over-credulous haste: but God above Deal between thee and me!	Macduff, this noble passion, Child of integrity, hath from my soul Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts To thy good truth and honour. Devilish Macbeth By many of these trains hath sought to win me Into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me From over-credulous haste: but God above Deal between thee and me! for even now I put myself to thy direction, and Unspeak mine own detraction, here abjure The taints and blames I laid upon myself, For strangers to my nature.	to control me, but my good sense stops me from being too quick to trust. May God judge between us!

modest wisdom	Macduff, this noble passion, Child of integrity, hath from my soul Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts To thy good truth and honour. Devilish Macbeth By many of these trains hath sought to win me Into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me From over-credulous haste: but God above Deal between thee and me! for even now I put myself to thy direction, and Unspeak mine own detraction, here abjure The taints and blames I laid upon myself, For strangers to my nature.	careful thinking

over-credulous haste	Macduff, this noble passion, Child of integrity, hath from my soul Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts To thy good truth and honour. Devilish Macbeth By many of these trains hath sought to win me Into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me From over-credulous haste: but God above Deal between thee and me! for even now I put myself to thy direction, and Unspeak mine own detraction, here abjure The taints and blames I laid upon myself, For strangers to my nature.	believing too quickly

Devilish Macbeth	Macduff, this noble passion, Child of integrity, hath from my soul Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts To thy good truth and honour. Devilish Macbeth By many of these trains hath sought to win me Into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me From over-credulous haste: but God above Deal between thee and me! for even now I put myself to thy direction, and Unspeak mine own detraction, here abjure The taints and blames I laid upon myself, For strangers to my nature.	The evil Macbeth.

For strangers to my nature.	Devilish Macbeth By many of these trains hath sought to win me Into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me From over-credulous haste: but God above Deal between thee and me! for even now I put myself to thy direction, and Unspeak mine own detraction, here abjure The taints and blames I laid upon myself, For strangers to my nature. I am yet Unknown to woman, never was forsworn, Scarcely have coveted what was mine own, At no time broke my faith, would not betray The devil to his fellow and delight No less in truth than life: my first false speaking Was this upon myself: what I am truly, Is thine and my poor country's to command: Whither indeed, before thy here-approach, Old Siward, with ten thousand warlike men, Already at a point, was setting forth.	Because they are not true to who I am.

Unspeak mine own detraction	Devilish Macbeth By many of these trains hath sought to win me Into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me From over-credulous haste: but God above Deal between thee and me! for even now I put myself to thy direction, and Unspeak mine own detraction, here abjure The taints and blames I laid upon myself, For strangers to my nature. I am yet Unknown to woman, never was forsworn, Scarcely have coveted what was mine own, At no time broke my faith, would not betray The devil to his fellow and delight No less in truth than life: my first false speaking Was this upon myself: what I am truly, Is thine and my poor country's to command: Whither indeed, before thy here-approach, Old Siward, with ten thousand warlike men, Already at a point, was setting forth.	Take back the bad things I said about myself.

ten thousand warlike men	for even now I put myself to thy direction, and Unspeak mine own detraction, here abjure The taints and blames I laid upon myself, For strangers to my nature. I am yet Unknown to woman, never was forsworn, Scarcely have coveted what was mine own, At no time broke my faith, would not betray The devil to his fellow and delight No less in truth than life: my first false speaking Was this upon myself: what I am truly, Is thine and my poor country's to command: Whither indeed, before thy here-approach, Old Siward, with ten thousand warlike men, Already at a point, was setting forth. Now we'll together; and the chance of goodness Be like our warranted quarrel!	ten thousand soldiers

speaking Was this upon myself: what I am truly, Is thine and my poor country's to command: Whither indeed, before thy here-approach, Old Siward, with ten thousand warlike men, Already at a point, was setting forth.	for even now I put myself to thy direction, and Unspeak mine own detraction, here abjure The taints and blames I laid upon myself, For strangers to my nature. I am yet Unknown to woman, never was forsworn, Scarcely have coveted what was mine own, At no time broke my faith, would not betray The devil to his fellow and delight No less in truth than life: my first false speaking Was this upon myself: what I am truly, Is thine and my poor country's to command: Whither indeed, before thy here-approach, Old Siward, with ten thousand warlike men, Already at a point, was setting forth. Now we'll together; and the chance of goodness Be like our warranted quarrel!	My false statement was about myself. What I truly am is at your and my country's service. In fact, before you arrived, old Siward was already prepared to set out with ten thousand soldiers.

Be like our warranted quarrel!	I am yet Unknown to woman, never was forsworn, Scarcely have coveted what was mine own, At no time broke my faith, would not betray The devil to his fellow and delight No less in truth than life: my first false speaking Was this upon myself: what I am truly, Is thine and my poor country's to command: Whither indeed, before thy here-approach, Old Siward, with ten thousand warlike men, Already at a point, was setting forth. Now we'll together; and the chance of goodness Be like our warranted quarrel! Why are you silent?	May our success match the righteousness of our cause!

our warranted quarrel	I am yet Unknown to woman, never was forsworn, Scarcely have coveted what was mine own, At no time broke my faith, would not betray The devil to his fellow and delight No less in truth than life: my first false speaking Was this upon myself: what I am truly, Is thine and my poor country's to command: Whither indeed, before thy here-approach, Old Siward, with ten thousand warlike men, Already at a point, was setting forth. Now we'll together; and the chance of goodness Be like our warranted quarrel! Why are you silent?	Our justified cause.

things at once 'Tis hard to reconcile.	Such welcome and unwelcome things at once 'Tis hard to reconcile.	It's hard to reconcile things being both welcome and unwelcome at the same time.

Such welcome and unwelcome things	Such welcome and unwelcome things at once 'Tis hard to reconcile.	Things that are both welcome and unwelcome.

The great assay	Ay, sir; there are a crew of wretched souls That stay his cure: their malady convinces The great assay of art; but at his touch— Such sanctity hath heaven given his hand— They presently amend.	The difficult challenge.

Such sanctity	Ay, sir; there are a crew of wretched souls That stay his cure: their malady convinces The great assay of art; but at his touch— Such sanctity hath heaven given his hand— They presently amend.	Such holiness

wretched souls	Ay, sir; there are a crew of wretched souls That stay his cure: their malady convinces The great assay of art; but at his touch— Such sanctity hath heaven given his hand— They presently amend.	unhappy people

work in this good king; Which often, since my here-remain in England, I have seen him do.	'Tis call'd the evil: A most miraculous work in this good king; Which often, since my here-remain in England, I have seen him do. How he solicits heaven, Himself best knows: but strangely-visited people, All swoln and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye, The mere despair of surgery, he cures, Hanging a golden stamp about their necks, Put on with holy prayers: and 'tis spoken, To the succeeding royalty he leaves The healing benediction.	a talent of this good king, which I have often seen him perform since I've been in England.

A most miraculous work	'Tis call'd the evil: A most miraculous work in this good king; Which often, since my here-remain in England, I have seen him do. How he solicits heaven, Himself best knows: but strangely-visited people, All swoln and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye, The mere despair of surgery, he cures, Hanging a golden stamp about their necks, Put on with holy prayers: and 'tis spoken, To the succeeding royalty he leaves The healing benediction.	A truly amazing thing.

The mere despair	the evil: A most miraculous work in this good king; Which often, since my here-remain in England, I have seen him do. How he solicits heaven, Himself best knows: but strangely-visited people, All swoln and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye, The mere despair of surgery, he cures, Hanging a golden stamp about their necks, Put on with holy prayers: and 'tis spoken, To the succeeding royalty he leaves The healing benediction. With this strange virtue, He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy, And sundry blessings hang about his throne, That speak him full of grace.	Hopeless cases.

strangely-visited people	the evil: A most miraculous work in this good king; Which often, since my here-remain in England, I have seen him do. How he solicits heaven, Himself best knows: but strangely-visited people, All swoln and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye, The mere despair of surgery, he cures, Hanging a golden stamp about their necks, Put on with holy prayers: and 'tis spoken, To the succeeding royalty he leaves The healing benediction. With this strange virtue, He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy, And sundry blessings hang about his throne, That speak him full of grace.	people afflicted with strange diseases

The healing benediction	the evil: A most miraculous work in this good king; Which often, since my here-remain in England, I have seen him do. How he solicits heaven, Himself best knows: but strangely-visited people, All swoln and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye, The mere despair of surgery, he cures, Hanging a golden stamp about their necks, Put on with holy prayers: and 'tis spoken, To the succeeding royalty he leaves The healing benediction. With this strange virtue, He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy, And sundry blessings hang about his throne, That speak him full of grace.	The blessing of healing.

people, All swoln and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye, The mere despair of surgery, he cures, Hanging a golden stamp about their necks, Put on with holy prayers: and 'tis spoken, To the succeeding royalty he leaves The healing benediction.	the evil: A most miraculous work in this good king; Which often, since my here-remain in England, I have seen him do. How he solicits heaven, Himself best knows: but strangely-visited people, All swoln and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye, The mere despair of surgery, he cures, Hanging a golden stamp about their necks, Put on with holy prayers: and 'tis spoken, To the succeeding royalty he leaves The healing benediction. With this strange virtue, He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy, And sundry blessings hang about his throne, That speak him full of grace.	People, all swollen and covered in sores, a terrible sight, whom doctors had given up on, he cures by hanging a gold coin around their necks while saying holy prayers. It is said that he passes on this healing power to future kings.

sundry blessings	How he solicits heaven, Himself best knows: but strangely-visited people, All swoln and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye, The mere despair of surgery, he cures, Hanging a golden stamp about their necks, Put on with holy prayers: and 'tis spoken, To the succeeding royalty he leaves The healing benediction. With this strange virtue, He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy, And sundry blessings hang about his throne, That speak him full of grace.	various blessings

a heavenly gift	How he solicits heaven, Himself best knows: but strangely-visited people, All swoln and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye, The mere despair of surgery, he cures, Hanging a golden stamp about their necks, Put on with holy prayers: and 'tis spoken, To the succeeding royalty he leaves The healing benediction. With this strange virtue, He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy, And sundry blessings hang about his throne, That speak him full of grace.	a gift from God

hath a heavenly gift of prophecy, And sundry blessings hang about his throne, That speak him full of grace.	How he solicits heaven, Himself best knows: but strangely-visited people, All swoln and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye, The mere despair of surgery, he cures, Hanging a golden stamp about their necks, Put on with holy prayers: and 'tis spoken, To the succeeding royalty he leaves The healing benediction. With this strange virtue, He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy, And sundry blessings hang about his throne, That speak him full of grace.	He has a divine gift of prophecy, and many blessings surround his throne, showing he's full of God's grace.

My ever-gentle cousin	My ever-gentle cousin, welcome hither.	My dear cousin

Alas, poor country!	Alas, poor country! Almost afraid to know itself.	Alas, poor country!

ask'd for who; and good men's lives Expire before the flowers in their caps, Dying or ere they sicken.	Almost afraid to know itself. It cannot Be call'd our mother, but our grave; where nothing, But who knows nothing, is once seen to smile; Where sighs and groans and shrieks that rend the air Are made, not mark'd; where violent sorrow seems A modern ecstasy; the dead man's knell Is there scarce ask'd for who; and good men's lives Expire before the flowers in their caps, Dying or ere they sicken.	No one asks who died; and good people die even faster than the flowers they wear, dying before they even get sick.

good men's lives	Almost afraid to know itself. It cannot Be call'd our mother, but our grave; where nothing, But who knows nothing, is once seen to smile; Where sighs and groans and shrieks that rend the air Are made, not mark'd; where violent sorrow seems A modern ecstasy; the dead man's knell Is there scarce ask'd for who; and good men's lives Expire before the flowers in their caps, Dying or ere they sicken.	Good people die

scarce ask'd	Almost afraid to know itself. It cannot Be call'd our mother, but our grave; where nothing, But who knows nothing, is once seen to smile; Where sighs and groans and shrieks that rend the air Are made, not mark'd; where violent sorrow seems A modern ecstasy; the dead man's knell Is there scarce ask'd for who; and good men's lives Expire before the flowers in their caps, Dying or ere they sicken.	barely asked

the dead man's knell	Almost afraid to know itself. It cannot Be call'd our mother, but our grave; where nothing, But who knows nothing, is once seen to smile; Where sighs and groans and shrieks that rend the air Are made, not mark'd; where violent sorrow seems A modern ecstasy; the dead man's knell Is there scarce ask'd for who; and good men's lives Expire before the flowers in their caps, Dying or ere they sicken.	The ringing of the bell for a dead person

A modern ecstasy	Almost afraid to know itself. It cannot Be call'd our mother, but our grave; where nothing, But who knows nothing, is once seen to smile; Where sighs and groans and shrieks that rend the air Are made, not mark'd; where violent sorrow seems A modern ecstasy; the dead man's knell Is there scarce ask'd for who; and good men's lives Expire before the flowers in their caps, Dying or ere they sicken.	A fashionable fit of grief

violent sorrow	Almost afraid to know itself. It cannot Be call'd our mother, but our grave; where nothing, But who knows nothing, is once seen to smile; Where sighs and groans and shrieks that rend the air Are made, not mark'd; where violent sorrow seems A modern ecstasy; the dead man's knell Is there scarce ask'd for who; and good men's lives Expire before the flowers in their caps, Dying or ere they sicken.	Intense grief.

the newest grief	What's the newest grief?	the newest grief

an hour's age	That of an hour's age doth hiss the speaker: Each minute teems a new one.	an hour ago

That of an hour's age doth hiss the speaker: Each minute teems a new one.	That of an hour's age doth hiss the speaker: Each minute teems a new one.	What was said an hour ago is now mocked: every minute brings something new.

has not batter'd at their peace?	The tyrant has not batter'd at their peace?	Hasn't he shattered their peace?

niggard of your speech: how goes't?	But not a niggard of your speech: how goes't?	Not stingy with your words: how are you doing?

But not a niggard	But not a niggard of your speech: how goes't?	Not stingy with your words.

fellows that were out; Which was to my belief witness'd the rather, For that I saw the tyrant's power a-foot: Now is the time of help; your eye in Scotland Would create soldiers, make our women fight, To doff their dire distresses.	When I came hither to transport the tidings, Which I have heavily borne, there ran a rumour Of many worthy fellows that were out; Which was to my belief witness'd the rather, For that I saw the tyrant's power a-foot: Now is the time of help; your eye in Scotland Would create soldiers, make our women fight, To doff their dire distresses.	men who were in rebellion. I believed it more because I saw the tyrant's army on the move. Now is the time to help; your presence in Scotland would inspire soldiers, make our women fight to cast off their terrible suffering.

their dire distresses	When I came hither to transport the tidings, Which I have heavily borne, there ran a rumour Of many worthy fellows that were out; Which was to my belief witness'd the rather, For that I saw the tyrant's power a-foot: Now is the time of help; your eye in Scotland Would create soldiers, make our women fight, To doff their dire distresses.	their terrible suffering

the tyrant's power	When I came hither to transport the tidings, Which I have heavily borne, there ran a rumour Of many worthy fellows that were out; Which was to my belief witness'd the rather, For that I saw the tyrant's power a-foot: Now is the time of help; your eye in Scotland Would create soldiers, make our women fight, To doff their dire distresses.	the tyrant's army

gracious England hath	Be't their comfort We are coming thither: gracious England hath Lent us good Siward and ten thousand men; An older and a better soldier none That Christendom gives out.	Gracious England has

comfort We are coming thither: gracious England hath Lent us good Siward and ten thousand men; An older and a better soldier none That Christendom gives out.	Be't their comfort We are coming thither: gracious England hath Lent us good Siward and ten thousand men; An older and a better soldier none That Christendom gives out.	They can take comfort in knowing we are coming there. Kind England has lent us the good Siward and ten thousand men. There isn't an older or better soldier in all of Christendom.

good Siward	Be't their comfort We are coming thither: gracious England hath Lent us good Siward and ten thousand men; An older and a better soldier none That Christendom gives out.	Good Siward.

words That would be howl'd out in the desert air, Where hearing should not latch them.	Would I could answer This comfort with the like! But I have words That would be howl'd out in the desert air, Where hearing should not latch them.	Words that should be screamed into the empty desert, where no one can hear them.

is it a fee-grief Due to some single breast?	The general cause? or is it a fee-grief Due to some single breast?	Is it a personal grief affecting only one person?

a fee-grief	The general cause? or is it a fee-grief Due to some single breast?	A personal sorrow.

Pertains to you alone.	No mind that's honest But in it shares some woe; though the main part Pertains to you alone.	Applies to you alone.

be mine, Keep it not from me, quickly let me have it.	If it be mine, Keep it not from me, quickly let me have it.	If it's mine, don't keep it from me, give it to me quickly.

despise my tongue for ever, Which shall possess them with the heaviest sound That ever yet they heard.	Let not your ears despise my tongue for ever, Which shall possess them with the heaviest sound That ever yet they heard.	Don't forever hate what I say next, which will be the worst thing you've ever heard.

quarry of these murder'd deer, To add the death of you.	Your castle is surprised; your wife and babes Savagely slaughter'd: to relate the manner, Were, on the quarry of these murder'd deer, To add the death of you.	To describe the scene would kill you too.

these murder'd deer	Your castle is surprised; your wife and babes Savagely slaughter'd: to relate the manner, Were, on the quarry of these murder'd deer, To add the death of you.	These murdered deer.

Merciful heaven	Merciful heaven! What, man!	Merciful heaven!

the o'er-fraught heart	What, man! ne'er pull your hat upon your brows; Give sorrow words: the grief that does not speak Whispers the o'er-fraught heart and bids it break.	The overwhelmed heart

sorrow words	What, man! ne'er pull your hat upon your brows; Give sorrow words: the grief that does not speak Whispers the o'er-fraught heart and bids it break.	Speak your sorrow.

grief that does not speak Whispers the o'er-fraught heart and bids it break.	What, man! ne'er pull your hat upon your brows; Give sorrow words: the grief that does not speak Whispers the o'er-fraught heart and bids it break.	Grief that isn't spoken whispers to the overwhelmed heart and tells it to break.

be from thence!	And I must be from thence! My wife kill'd too?	To be from there!

medicines of our great revenge, To cure this deadly grief.	Be comforted: Let's make us medicines of our great revenge, To cure this deadly grief.	Our great revenge will be the medicine to cure this deadly grief.

this deadly grief	Be comforted: Let's make us medicines of our great revenge, To cure this deadly grief.	this terrible sorrow

O hell-kite	Did you say all? O hell-kite! All?	O devil!

Fell slaughter on their souls.	Sinful Macduff, They were all struck for thee! naught that I am, Not for their own demerits, but for mine, Fell slaughter on their souls. Heaven rest them now!	Their souls were brutally murdered.

their own demerits	Sinful Macduff, They were all struck for thee! naught that I am, Not for their own demerits, but for mine, Fell slaughter on their souls. Heaven rest them now!	their own sins

whetstone of your sword: let grief Convert to anger; blunt not the heart, enrage it.	Be this the whetstone of your sword: let grief Convert to anger; blunt not the heart, enrage it.	Sharpen your sword with this: turn grief into anger; don't dull your heart, inflame it.

braggart with my tongue!	O, I could play the woman with mine eyes And braggart with my tongue! But, gentle heavens, Cut short all intermission; front to front Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself; Within my sword's length set him; if he 'scape, Heaven forgive him too!	boast with my words!

heavens, Cut short all intermission; front to front Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself; Within my sword's length set him; if he 'scape, Heaven forgive him too!	O, I could play the woman with mine eyes And braggart with my tongue! But, gentle heavens, Cut short all intermission; front to front Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself; Within my sword's length set him; if he 'scape, Heaven forgive him too!	Heavens, end this delay! Bring that Scottish devil and me face to face. Put him within my sword's reach; if he gets away, then may God forgive him!

my sword's length	O, I could play the woman with mine eyes And braggart with my tongue! But, gentle heavens, Cut short all intermission; front to front Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself; Within my sword's length set him; if he 'scape, Heaven forgive him too!	within reach of my sword

is ready; Our lack is nothing but our leave; Macbeth Is ripe for shaking, and the powers above Put on their instruments.	This tune goes manly. Come, go we to the king; our power is ready; Our lack is nothing but our leave; Macbeth Is ripe for shaking, and the powers above Put on their instruments. Receive what cheer you may: The night is long that never finds the day.	Our forces are ready; all we need is permission to leave. Macbeth is ready to be overthrown, and the heavens are preparing to act.

watched with you, but can perceive no truth in your report.	I have two nights watched with you, but can perceive no truth in your report. When was it she last walked?	Stayed awake with you, but I don't believe what you're saying.

her night-gown	Since his majesty went into the field, I have seen her rise from her bed, throw her night-gown upon her, unlock her closet, take forth paper, fold it, write upon't, read it, afterwards seal it, and again return to bed; yet all this while in a most fast sleep.	her robe

rise from her bed, throw her night-gown upon her, unlock her closet, take forth paper, fold it, write upon't, read it, afterwards seal it, and again return to bed; yet all this while in a most fast sleep.	Since his majesty went into the field, I have seen her rise from her bed, throw her night-gown upon her, unlock her closet, take forth paper, fold it, write upon't, read it, afterwards seal it, and again return to bed; yet all this while in a most fast sleep.	get out of bed, put on her nightgown, unlock her cabinet, take out paper, fold it, write on it, read it, then seal it, and go back to bed; all while sound asleep.

A great perturbation	A great perturbation in nature, to receive at once the benefit of sleep, and do the effects of watching! In this slumbery agitation, besides her walking and other actual performances, what, at any time, have you heard her say?	A lot of disturbance.

benefit of sleep, and do the effects of watching!	A great perturbation in nature, to receive at once the benefit of sleep, and do the effects of watching! In this slumbery agitation, besides her walking and other actual performances, what, at any time, have you heard her say?	Get the rest of sleep while acting as if awake!

this slumbery agitation	A great perturbation in nature, to receive at once the benefit of sleep, and do the effects of watching! In this slumbery agitation, besides her walking and other actual performances, what, at any time, have you heard her say?	This restless sleep

may to me: and 'tis most meet you should.	You may to me: and 'tis most meet you should.	You can speak frankly to me, and it's right that you do.

witness to confirm my speech.	Neither to you nor any one; having no witness to confirm my speech. Lo you, here she comes!	someone to back up what I'm saying.

has light by her continually; 'tis her command.	Why, it stood by her: she has light by her continually; 'tis her command.	She always has a light with her; it's her order.

rubs her hands.	What is it she does now? Look, how she rubs her hands.	rubs her hands.

an accustomed action	It is an accustomed action with her, to seem thus washing her hands: I have known her continue in this a quarter of an hour.	a habit

comes from her, to satisfy my remembrance the more strongly.	Hark! she speaks: I will set down what comes from her, to satisfy my remembrance the more strongly.	what she says, to remember it better.

time to do't.—Hell is murky!—Fie, my lord, fie! a soldier, and afeard?	Out, damned spot! out, I say!—One: two: why, then, 'tis time to do't.—Hell is murky!—Fie, my lord, fie! a soldier, and afeard? What need we fear who knows it, when none can call our power to account?—Yet who would have thought the old man to have had so much blood in him.	It's time to do it. Hell is dark! Shame on you, my lord, shame! A soldier, and afraid?

tis time	Out, damned spot! out, I say!—One: two: why, then, 'tis time to do't.—Hell is murky!—Fie, my lord, fie! a soldier, and afeard? What need we fear who knows it, when none can call our power to account?—Yet who would have thought the old man to have had so much blood in him.	It's time.

call our power to account?—Yet who would have thought the old man to have had so much blood in him.	out, I say!—One: two: why, then, 'tis time to do't.—Hell is murky!—Fie, my lord, fie! a soldier, and afeard? What need we fear who knows it, when none can call our power to account?—Yet who would have thought the old man to have had so much blood in him.	Who can question our authority? Still, who would have thought the old man had so much blood in him?

that, my lord, no more o' that: you mar all with this starting.	The thane of Fife had a wife: where is she now?— What, will these hands ne'er be clean?—No more o' that, my lord, no more o' that: you mar all with this starting.	That's enough, my lord, that's enough. You're ruining everything by reacting like this.

sure of that: heaven knows what she has known.	She has spoke what she should not, I am sure of that: heaven knows what she has known.	I'm sure of that. God knows what she knew.

smell of the blood still: all the perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little hand.	Here's the smell of the blood still: all the perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little hand. Oh, oh, oh!	The smell of blood is still here. All the perfumes in the world can't mask the smell on this hand.

What a sigh	What a sigh is there! The heart is sorely charged.	What a sigh!

dignity of the whole body.	I would not have such a heart in my bosom for the dignity of the whole body.	The importance of my physical well-being.

died holily in their beds.	This disease is beyond my practise: yet I have known those which have walked in their sleep who have died holily in their beds.	died peacefully in their sleep.

tell you yet again, Banquo's buried; he cannot come out on's grave.	Wash your hands, put on your nightgown; look not so pale.—I tell you yet again, Banquo's buried; he cannot come out on's grave.	I'm telling you again, Banquo is dead and buried; he can't come out of his grave.

unnatural deeds	Foul whisperings are abroad: unnatural deeds Do breed unnatural troubles: infected minds To their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets: More needs she the divine than the physician. God, God forgive us all!	Strange actions

unnatural troubles	Foul whisperings are abroad: unnatural deeds Do breed unnatural troubles: infected minds To their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets: More needs she the divine than the physician. God, God forgive us all!	Strange problems

Foul whisperings	Foul whisperings are abroad: unnatural deeds Do breed unnatural troubles: infected minds To their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets: More needs she the divine than the physician. God, God forgive us all!	Nasty rumors

means of all annoyance, And still keep eyes upon her.	God, God forgive us all! Look after her; Remove from her the means of all annoyance, And still keep eyes upon her. So, good night:	anything that bothers her, and keep watching over her.

burn in them; for their dear causes Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm Excite the mortified man.	The English power is near, led on by Malcolm, His uncle Siward and the good Macduff: Revenges burn in them; for their dear causes Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm Excite the mortified man.	They are burning with revenge; the terrible sights and sounds of war would rouse even someone who has given up on life.

the mortified man	The English power is near, led on by Malcolm, His uncle Siward and the good Macduff: Revenges burn in them; for their dear causes Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm Excite the mortified man.	Even a dead man.

the good Macduff	The English power is near, led on by Malcolm, His uncle Siward and the good Macduff: Revenges burn in them; for their dear causes Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm Excite the mortified man.	the good Macduff

the grim alarm	The English power is near, led on by Malcolm, His uncle Siward and the good Macduff: Revenges burn in them; for their dear causes Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm Excite the mortified man.	the terrible battle

many unrough youths	For certain, sir, he is not: I have a file Of all the gentry: there is Siward's son, And many unrough youths that even now Protest their first of manhood.	many beardless youths

Siward's son	For certain, sir, he is not: I have a file Of all the gentry: there is Siward's son, And many unrough youths that even now Protest their first of manhood.	Siward's son

first of manhood.	For certain, sir, he is not: I have a file Of all the gentry: there is Siward's son, And many unrough youths that even now Protest their first of manhood.	Their first display of being a man.

all the gentry	For certain, sir, he is not: I have a file Of all the gentry: there is Siward's son, And many unrough youths that even now Protest their first of manhood.	all the noblemen

his distemper'd cause	Great Dunsinane he strongly fortifies: Some say he's mad; others that lesser hate him Do call it valiant fury: but, for certain, He cannot buckle his distemper'd cause Within the belt of rule.	his troubled situation

valiant fury	Great Dunsinane he strongly fortifies: Some say he's mad; others that lesser hate him Do call it valiant fury: but, for certain, He cannot buckle his distemper'd cause Within the belt of rule.	Courageous rage.

Hang loose about him, like a giant's robe Upon a dwarfish thief.	Now does he feel His secret murders sticking on his hands; Now minutely revolts upbraid his faith-breach; Those he commands move only in command, Nothing in love: now does he feel his title Hang loose about him, like a giant's robe Upon a dwarfish thief.	Fits him poorly, like a giant's robe on a little thief.

a dwarfish thief	Now does he feel His secret murders sticking on his hands; Now minutely revolts upbraid his faith-breach; Those he commands move only in command, Nothing in love: now does he feel his title Hang loose about him, like a giant's robe Upon a dwarfish thief.	a short thief

a giant's robe	Now does he feel His secret murders sticking on his hands; Now minutely revolts upbraid his faith-breach; Those he commands move only in command, Nothing in love: now does he feel his title Hang loose about him, like a giant's robe Upon a dwarfish thief.	a robe that's way too big

is within him does condemn Itself for being there?	Who then shall blame His pester'd senses to recoil and start, When all that is within him does condemn Itself for being there?	inside him condemns itself for existing?

obedience where 'tis truly owed:	Well, march we on, To give obedience where 'tis truly owed: Meet we the medicine of the sickly weal, And with him pour we in our country's purge Each drop of us.	Obedience that is rightfully due.

our country's purge	Well, march we on, To give obedience where 'tis truly owed: Meet we the medicine of the sickly weal, And with him pour we in our country's purge Each drop of us.	What will cleanse our country

the sickly weal	Well, march we on, To give obedience where 'tis truly owed: Meet we the medicine of the sickly weal, And with him pour we in our country's purge Each drop of us.	The sick country.

medicine of the sickly weal, And with him pour we in our country's purge Each drop of us.	Well, march we on, To give obedience where 'tis truly owed: Meet we the medicine of the sickly weal, And with him pour we in our country's purge Each drop of us.	the cure for our sick country, and together with him, let's offer ourselves completely to cleanse our nation.

needs, To dew the sovereign flower and drown the weeds.	Or so much as it needs, To dew the sovereign flower and drown the weeds. Make we our march towards Birnam.	Enough to water the good plants and kill the bad ones.

the sovereign flower	Or so much as it needs, To dew the sovereign flower and drown the weeds. Make we our march towards Birnam.	the rightful king

march towards Birnam.	Or so much as it needs, To dew the sovereign flower and drown the weeds. Make we our march towards Birnam.	Let's go towards Birnam.

Birnam wood	Bring me no more reports; let them fly all: Till Birnam wood remove to Dunsinane, I cannot taint with fear. What's the boy Malcolm?	(Until) Birnam Wood moves to Dunsinane.

taint with fear.	Bring me no more reports; let them fly all: Till Birnam wood remove to Dunsinane, I cannot taint with fear. What's the boy Malcolm?	be affected by fear.

boy Malcolm?	Bring me no more reports; let them fly all: Till Birnam wood remove to Dunsinane, I cannot taint with fear. What's the boy Malcolm? Was he not born of woman?	What about young Malcolm?

All mortal consequences	Was he not born of woman? The spirits that know All mortal consequences have pronounced me thus: 'Fear not, Macbeth; no man that's born of woman Shall e'er have power upon thee.' Then fly, false thanes, And mingle with the English epicures: The mind I sway by and the heart I bear Shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear.	Everything that can happen to a human being.

man that's born of woman Shall e'er have power upon thee.'	Was he not born of woman? The spirits that know All mortal consequences have pronounced me thus: 'Fear not, Macbeth; no man that's born of woman Shall e'er have power upon thee.' Then fly, false thanes, And mingle with the English epicures: The mind I sway by and the heart I bear Shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear.	a man born from a woman will never defeat you.

the English epicures	The spirits that know All mortal consequences have pronounced me thus: 'Fear not, Macbeth; no man that's born of woman Shall e'er have power upon thee.' Then fly, false thanes, And mingle with the English epicures: The mind I sway by and the heart I bear Shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear.	English people who love pleasure and luxury.

, false thanes	The spirits that know All mortal consequences have pronounced me thus: 'Fear not, Macbeth; no man that's born of woman Shall e'er have power upon thee.' Then fly, false thanes, And mingle with the English epicures: The mind I sway by and the heart I bear Shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear.	, you treacherous nobles

devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon!	The devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon! Where got'st thou that goose look?	May the devil damn you, you pale-faced idiot!

cream-faced loon	The devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon! Where got'st thou that goose look?	You pale-faced idiot!

Geese, villain!	Geese, villain!	Geese, you scoundrel!

Go prick thy face, and over-red thy fear, Thou lily-liver'd boy.	Go prick thy face, and over-red thy fear, Thou lily-liver'd boy. What soldiers, patch?	Go prick your face to bring some color and hide your fear, you cowardly boy.

counsellors to fear.	Death of thy soul! those linen cheeks of thine Are counsellors to fear. What soldiers, whey-face?	They make you look afraid.

those linen cheeks	Death of thy soul! those linen cheeks of thine Are counsellors to fear. What soldiers, whey-face?	Your pale face

push Will cheer me ever, or disseat me now.	Take thy face hence. Seyton!—I am sick at heart, When I behold—Seyton, I say!—This push Will cheer me ever, or disseat me now. I have lived long enough: my way of life Is fall'n into the sear, the yellow leaf; And that which should accompany old age, As honour, love, obedience, troops of friends, I must not look to have; but, in their stead, Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honour, breath, Which the poor heart would fain deny, and dare not.	This battle will either make me happy forever or destroy me now.

troops of friends, I must not look to have; but, in their stead, Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honour, breath, Which the poor heart would fain deny, and dare not.	Seyton!—I am sick at heart, When I behold—Seyton, I say!—This push Will cheer me ever, or disseat me now. I have lived long enough: my way of life Is fall'n into the sear, the yellow leaf; And that which should accompany old age, As honour, love, obedience, troops of friends, I must not look to have; but, in their stead, Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honour, breath, Which the poor heart would fain deny, and dare not. Seyton!	I can't expect to have friends; instead, I have deep, quiet curses, insincere praise, empty words that my heart wants to reject, but I don't dare to.

your gracious pleasure	What is your gracious pleasure?	What you would like.

confirm'd, my lord, which was reported.	All is confirm'd, my lord, which was reported.	It's confirmed, my lord, what was reported.

fight till from my bones my flesh be hack'd.	I'll fight till from my bones my flesh be hack'd. Give me my armour.	fight until my flesh is hacked from my bones.

those that talk of fear.	I'll put it on. Send out more horses; skirr the country round; Hang those that talk of fear. Give me mine armour.	Hang anyone who speaks of fear.

mine armour	Send out more horses; skirr the country round; Hang those that talk of fear. Give me mine armour. How does your patient, doctor?	my armor

sick, my lord, As she is troubled with thick coming fancies, That keep her from her rest.	Not so sick, my lord, As she is troubled with thick coming fancies, That keep her from her rest.	Ill, my lord, but more troubled by disturbing thoughts that won't let her sleep.

some sweet oblivious antidote	Cure her of that. Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased, Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow, Raze out the written troubles of the brain And with some sweet oblivious antidote Cleanse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous stuff Which weighs upon the heart?	some sweet medicine to make her forget

the stuff'd bosom	Cure her of that. Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased, Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow, Raze out the written troubles of the brain And with some sweet oblivious antidote Cleanse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous stuff Which weighs upon the heart?	A troubled heart.

Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow, Raze out the written troubles of the brain And with some sweet oblivious antidote Cleanse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous stuff Which weighs upon the heart?	Cure her of that. Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased, Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow, Raze out the written troubles of the brain And with some sweet oblivious antidote Cleanse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous stuff Which weighs upon the heart?	Erase the deep-seated sorrow from her memory, wipe away the anxieties plaguing her mind, and with some soothing medicine, cleanse her heart of the dangerous pain that weighs it down.

a rooted sorrow	Cure her of that. Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased, Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow, Raze out the written troubles of the brain And with some sweet oblivious antidote Cleanse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous stuff Which weighs upon the heart?	A deep-seated sadness.

that perilous stuff	Cure her of that. Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased, Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow, Raze out the written troubles of the brain And with some sweet oblivious antidote Cleanse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous stuff Which weighs upon the heart?	that dangerous feeling

mine armour	Throw physic to the dogs; I'll none of it. Come, put mine armour on; give me my staff. Seyton, send out.	my armor

purge it to a sound and pristine health, I would applaud thee to the very echo, That should applaud again.—Pull't off, I say.— What rhubarb, cyme, or what purgative drug, Would scour these English hence?	Come, sir, dispatch. If thou couldst, doctor, cast The water of my land, find her disease, And purge it to a sound and pristine health, I would applaud thee to the very echo, That should applaud again.—Pull't off, I say.— What rhubarb, cyme, or what purgative drug, Would scour these English hence? Hear'st thou of them?	...restore it to perfect health, I would praise you so much that the echoes would praise you back. Take it off, I say! What medicine, what strong drug, could get rid of these English people?

what purgative drug	Come, sir, dispatch. If thou couldst, doctor, cast The water of my land, find her disease, And purge it to a sound and pristine health, I would applaud thee to the very echo, That should applaud again.—Pull't off, I say.— What rhubarb, cyme, or what purgative drug, Would scour these English hence? Hear'st thou of them?	What medicine

a sound and pristine health	Come, sir, dispatch. If thou couldst, doctor, cast The water of my land, find her disease, And purge it to a sound and pristine health, I would applaud thee to the very echo, That should applaud again.—Pull't off, I say.— What rhubarb, cyme, or what purgative drug, Would scour these English hence? Hear'st thou of them?	perfect and original health

come to Dunsinane.	Bring it after me. I will not be afraid of death and bane, Till Birnam forest come to Dunsinane.	come to Dunsinane.

Birnam forest	Bring it after me. I will not be afraid of death and bane, Till Birnam forest come to Dunsinane.	Birnam Forest

wood of Birnam.	The wood of Birnam.	Birnam Wood.

hew him down a bough And bear't before him: thereby shall we shadow The numbers of our host and make discovery Err in report of us.	Let every soldier hew him down a bough And bear't before him: thereby shall we shadow The numbers of our host and make discovery Err in report of us.	Every soldier should cut down a branch and carry it in front of him. This will hide how many of us there are, so the enemy will underestimate our numbers.

Keeps still in Dunsinane, and will endure Our setting down before 't.	We learn no other but the confident tyrant Keeps still in Dunsinane, and will endure Our setting down before 't.	He's still in Dunsinane and will let us besiege it.

the confident tyrant	We learn no other but the confident tyrant Keeps still in Dunsinane, and will endure Our setting down before 't.	The arrogant tyrant.

advantage to be given, Both more and less have given him the revolt, And none serve with him but constrained things Whose hearts are absent too.	'Tis his main hope: For where there is advantage to be given, Both more and less have given him the revolt, And none serve with him but constrained things Whose hearts are absent too.	His best hope is that people will betray their leaders for personal gain. Both high-ranking and low-ranking people have already abandoned him. The only ones who still serve him are forced to, and their hearts aren't in it.

constrained things	'Tis his main hope: For where there is advantage to be given, Both more and less have given him the revolt, And none serve with him but constrained things Whose hearts are absent too.	forced people

Industrious soldiership	Let our just censures Attend the true event, and put we on Industrious soldiership.	Diligent military service.

put we on Industrious soldiership.	Let our just censures Attend the true event, and put we on Industrious soldiership.	let's be diligent soldiers.

our just censures	Let our just censures Attend the true event, and put we on Industrious soldiership.	our fair judgment

make us know What we shall say we have and what we owe.	The time approaches That will with due decision make us know What we shall say we have and what we owe. Thoughts speculative their unsure hopes relate, But certain issue strokes must arbitrate: Towards which advance the war.	make us realize what we truly own and what we are responsible for.

their unsure hopes	The time approaches That will with due decision make us know What we shall say we have and what we owe. Thoughts speculative their unsure hopes relate, But certain issue strokes must arbitrate: Towards which advance the war.	their uncertain hopes

speculative their unsure hopes relate, But certain issue strokes must arbitrate: Towards which advance the war.	The time approaches That will with due decision make us know What we shall say we have and what we owe. Thoughts speculative their unsure hopes relate, But certain issue strokes must arbitrate: Towards which advance the war.	Uncertain hopes are based on speculation, but the definite outcome will be decided by the blows of war, towards which the war progresses.

the outward walls	Hang out our banners on the outward walls; The cry is still 'They come:' our castle's strength Will laugh a siege to scorn: here let them lie Till famine and the ague eat them up: Were they not forced with those that should be ours, We might have met them dareful, beard to beard, And beat them backward home.	The walls facing the enemy.

our castle's strength	Hang out our banners on the outward walls; The cry is still 'They come:' our castle's strength Will laugh a siege to scorn: here let them lie Till famine and the ague eat them up: Were they not forced with those that should be ours, We might have met them dareful, beard to beard, And beat them backward home.	our strong castle

Hang out our banners on the outward walls; The cry is still 'They come:' our castle's strength Will laugh a siege to scorn: here let them lie Till famine and the ague eat them up: Were they not forced with those that should be ours, We might have met them dareful, beard to beard, And beat them backward home.	Hang out our banners on the outward walls; The cry is still 'They come:' our castle's strength Will laugh a siege to scorn: here let them lie Till famine and the ague eat them up: Were they not forced with those that should be ours, We might have met them dareful, beard to beard, And beat them backward home.	Raise our flags high on the outer walls! The word is still, "They're coming!" Our strong castle will mock any attack. Let them stay out there until hunger and disease destroy them. If they weren't joined by our own people who betrayed us, we could have faced them bravely, man to man, and driven them back where they came from.

my slaughterous thoughts	I have almost forgot the taste of fears; The time has been, my senses would have cool'd To hear a night-shriek; and my fell of hair Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir As life were in't: I have supp'd full with horrors; Direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughts Cannot once start me.	my murderous thoughts

familiar to my slaughterous thoughts Cannot once start me.	I have almost forgot the taste of fears; The time has been, my senses would have cool'd To hear a night-shriek; and my fell of hair Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir As life were in't: I have supp'd full with horrors; Direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughts Cannot once start me.	Being so used to horrible thoughts, nothing can surprise me anymore.

a night-shriek	I have almost forgot the taste of fears; The time has been, my senses would have cool'd To hear a night-shriek; and my fell of hair Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir As life were in't: I have supp'd full with horrors; Direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughts Cannot once start me.	a scream in the night

the last syllable	She should have died hereafter; There would have been a time for such a word. To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow, Creeps in this petty pace from day to day To the last syllable of recorded time, And all our yesterdays have lighted fools The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle!	the very end

dusty death	She should have died hereafter; There would have been a time for such a word. To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow, Creeps in this petty pace from day to day To the last syllable of recorded time, And all our yesterdays have lighted fools The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle!	Death and decay.

all our yesterdays	She should have died hereafter; There would have been a time for such a word. To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow, Creeps in this petty pace from day to day To the last syllable of recorded time, And all our yesterdays have lighted fools The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle!	everything that has happened in the past

syllable of recorded time, And all our yesterdays have lighted fools The way to dusty death.	She should have died hereafter; There would have been a time for such a word. To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow, Creeps in this petty pace from day to day To the last syllable of recorded time, And all our yesterdays have lighted fools The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle!	the end of history. And everything we've done in the past has shown fools the path to death.

this petty pace	She should have died hereafter; There would have been a time for such a word. To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow, Creeps in this petty pace from day to day To the last syllable of recorded time, And all our yesterdays have lighted fools The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle!	This slow, monotonous way.

frets his hour upon the stage	Out, out, brief candle! Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player That struts and frets his hour upon the stage And then is heard no more: it is a tale Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, Signifying nothing.	worries and stresses during his short time acting

full of sound and fury, Signifying nothing.	Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player That struts and frets his hour upon the stage And then is heard no more: it is a tale Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, Signifying nothing.	noisy and emotional, but meaningless.

Thou comest	Thou comest to use thy tongue; thy story quickly.	You're here.

comest to use thy tongue; thy story quickly.	Thou comest to use thy tongue; thy story quickly.	You're here to talk; tell your story quickly.

see it coming; I say, a moving grove.	Let me endure your wrath, if't be not so: Within this three mile may you see it coming; I say, a moving grove.	You'll see it coming; I'm telling you, it's a forest moving.

care not if thou dost for me as much.	If thou speak'st false, Upon the next tree shalt thou hang alive, Till famine cling thee: if thy speech be sooth, I care not if thou dost for me as much. I pull in resolution, and begin To doubt the equivocation of the fiend That lies like truth: 'Fear not, till Birnam wood Do come to Dunsinane:' and now a wood Comes toward Dunsinane.	I don't care if you do the same to me.

Birnam wood	If thou speak'st false, Upon the next tree shalt thou hang alive, Till famine cling thee: if thy speech be sooth, I care not if thou dost for me as much. I pull in resolution, and begin To doubt the equivocation of the fiend That lies like truth: 'Fear not, till Birnam wood Do come to Dunsinane:' and now a wood Comes toward Dunsinane. Arm, arm, and out!	Birnam Wood.

equivocation of the fiend That lies like truth: 'Fear not, till Birnam wood Do come to Dunsinane:' and now a wood Comes toward Dunsinane.	If thou speak'st false, Upon the next tree shalt thou hang alive, Till famine cling thee: if thy speech be sooth, I care not if thou dost for me as much. I pull in resolution, and begin To doubt the equivocation of the fiend That lies like truth: 'Fear not, till Birnam wood Do come to Dunsinane:' and now a wood Comes toward Dunsinane. Arm, arm, and out!	the devil's tricky words that sounded like truth: "Don't be afraid until Birnam Wood comes to Dunsinane." And now a wood is moving toward Dunsinane.

this which he avouches does appear, There is nor flying hence nor tarrying here.	Arm, arm, and out! If this which he avouches does appear, There is nor flying hence nor tarrying here. I gin to be aweary of the sun, And wish the estate o' the world were now undone.	If what he claims turns out to be true, there's no escaping or staying here.

aweary of the sun, And wish the estate o' the world were now undone.	If this which he avouches does appear, There is nor flying hence nor tarrying here. I gin to be aweary of the sun, And wish the estate o' the world were now undone. Ring the alarum-bell!	Tired of the world, and wish it would all end.

the alarum-bell	I gin to be aweary of the sun, And wish the estate o' the world were now undone. Ring the alarum-bell! Blow, wind!	the alarm bell

die with harness on our back.	come, wrack! At least we'll die with harness on our back.	die fighting.

your leafy screens	Now near enough: your leafy screens throw down. And show like those you are.	Your leaves.

worthy Macduff	And show like those you are. You, worthy uncle, Shall, with my cousin, your right-noble son, Lead our first battle: worthy Macduff and we Shall take upon 's what else remains to do, According to our order.	Worthy Macduff.

You, worthy uncle, Shall, with my cousin, your right-noble son, Lead our first battle: worthy Macduff and we Shall take upon 's what else remains to do, According to our order.	And show like those you are. You, worthy uncle, Shall, with my cousin, your right-noble son, Lead our first battle: worthy Macduff and we Shall take upon 's what else remains to do, According to our order.	You, my good uncle, will lead our first attack with your very noble son, my cousin. Worthy Macduff and I will take care of whatever else needs to be done, following our plan.

the tyrant's power	Fare you well. Do we but find the tyrant's power to-night, Let us be beaten, if we cannot fight.	the tyrant's army

give them all breath, Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.	Make all our trumpets speak; give them all breath, Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.	Let them blast with all their might, those noisy messengers of bloodshed and death.

Those clamorous harbingers	Make all our trumpets speak; give them all breath, Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.	Those noisy messengers.

all our trumpets	Make all our trumpets speak; give them all breath, Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.	all our trumpets

thou call'st thyself a hotter name Than any is in hell.	No; though thou call'st thyself a hotter name Than any is in hell.	You call yourself a worse name than anything in hell.

My name's Macbeth	My name's Macbeth.	My name's Macbeth

devil himself could not pronounce a title More hateful to mine ear.	The devil himself could not pronounce a title More hateful to mine ear.	Even the devil couldn't say a word I hate more.

abhorred tyrant	Thou liest, abhorred tyrant; with my sword I'll prove the lie thou speak'st.	hated tyrant

prove the lie thou speak'st.	Thou liest, abhorred tyrant; with my sword I'll prove the lie thou speak'st.	prove that you are lying.

Thou wast	Thou wast born of woman But swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn, Brandish'd by man that's of a woman born.	You were

swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn,	Thou wast born of woman But swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn, Brandish'd by man that's of a woman born.	I smile at swords, I laugh at weapons.

's of a woman born.	Thou wast born of woman But swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn, Brandish'd by man that's of a woman born.	Born from a woman.

be'st slain and with no stroke of mine, My wife and children's ghosts will haunt me still.	Tyrant, show thy face! If thou be'st slain and with no stroke of mine, My wife and children's ghosts will haunt me still. I cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms Are hired to bear their staves: either thou, Macbeth, Or else my sword with an unbatter'd edge I sheathe again undeeded.	If you are killed, and not by my hand, I will still be haunted by the ghosts of my wife and children.

children's ghosts	Tyrant, show thy face! If thou be'st slain and with no stroke of mine, My wife and children's ghosts will haunt me still. I cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms Are hired to bear their staves: either thou, Macbeth, Or else my sword with an unbatter'd edge I sheathe again undeeded.	children's ghosts

wretched kerns	If thou be'st slain and with no stroke of mine, My wife and children's ghosts will haunt me still. I cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms Are hired to bear their staves: either thou, Macbeth, Or else my sword with an unbatter'd edge I sheathe again undeeded. There thou shouldst be; By this great clatter, one of greatest note Seems bruited.	miserable foot soldiers

strike at wretched kerns, whose arms Are hired to bear their staves: either thou, Macbeth, Or else my sword with an unbatter'd edge I sheathe again undeeded.	If thou be'st slain and with no stroke of mine, My wife and children's ghosts will haunt me still. I cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms Are hired to bear their staves: either thou, Macbeth, Or else my sword with an unbatter'd edge I sheathe again undeeded. There thou shouldst be; By this great clatter, one of greatest note Seems bruited.	attack those poor foot soldiers, who are paid to carry spears. It has to be you, Macbeth, or I'll put my unused sword away without a fight.

an unbatter'd edge	If thou be'st slain and with no stroke of mine, My wife and children's ghosts will haunt me still. I cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms Are hired to bear their staves: either thou, Macbeth, Or else my sword with an unbatter'd edge I sheathe again undeeded. There thou shouldst be; By this great clatter, one of greatest note Seems bruited.	a sword that hasn't been used

one of greatest note Seems bruited.	I cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms Are hired to bear their staves: either thou, Macbeth, Or else my sword with an unbatter'd edge I sheathe again undeeded. There thou shouldst be; By this great clatter, one of greatest note Seems bruited. Let me find him, fortune!	Someone important seems to be in the thick of the fight.

this great clatter	I cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms Are hired to bear their staves: either thou, Macbeth, Or else my sword with an unbatter'd edge I sheathe again undeeded. There thou shouldst be; By this great clatter, one of greatest note Seems bruited. Let me find him, fortune!	This loud noise.

The tyrant's people	This way, my lord; the castle's gently render'd: The tyrant's people on both sides do fight; The noble thanes do bravely in the war; The day almost itself professes yours, And little is to do.	The tyrant's soldiers

The noble thanes	This way, my lord; the castle's gently render'd: The tyrant's people on both sides do fight; The noble thanes do bravely in the war; The day almost itself professes yours, And little is to do.	The noble lords

do bravely in the war; The day almost itself professes yours, And little is to do.	This way, my lord; the castle's gently render'd: The tyrant's people on both sides do fight; The noble thanes do bravely in the war; The day almost itself professes yours, And little is to do.	are fighting bravely in the war; victory is almost certain, and there's little left to do.

the castle's gently render'd	This way, my lord; the castle's gently render'd: The tyrant's people on both sides do fight; The noble thanes do bravely in the war; The day almost itself professes yours, And little is to do.	The castle has been easily surrendered.

met with foes That strike beside us.	We have met with foes That strike beside us.	Encountered enemies who attack from within our ranks.

charged With blood of thine already.	Of all men else I have avoided thee: But get thee back; my soul is too much charged With blood of thine already.	Already guilty of spilling your blood.

thou bloodier villain Than terms can give thee out!	I have no words: My voice is in my sword: thou bloodier villain Than terms can give thee out!	You are a more bloodthirsty villain than words can describe!

bloodier villain	I have no words: My voice is in my sword: thou bloodier villain Than terms can give thee out!	bloodier villain

losest labour	Thou losest labour: As easy mayst thou the intrenchant air With thy keen sword impress as make me bleed: Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests; I bear a charmed life, which must not yield, To one of woman born.	wasting your effort

the intrenchant air	Thou losest labour: As easy mayst thou the intrenchant air With thy keen sword impress as make me bleed: Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests; I bear a charmed life, which must not yield, To one of woman born.	The air that cannot be cut.

a charmed life	Thou losest labour: As easy mayst thou the intrenchant air With thy keen sword impress as make me bleed: Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests; I bear a charmed life, which must not yield, To one of woman born.	A life protected by magic.

fall thy blade on vulnerable crests; I bear a charmed life, which must not yield, To one of woman born.	Thou losest labour: As easy mayst thou the intrenchant air With thy keen sword impress as make me bleed: Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests; I bear a charmed life, which must not yield, To one of woman born.	Drop your sword on those who can be hurt; I have a charmed life and cannot be killed by anyone born of a woman.

Untimely ripp'd	Despair thy charm; And let the angel whom thou still hast served Tell thee, Macduff was from his mother's womb Untimely ripp'd.	Born by Caesarean section.

his mother's womb	Despair thy charm; And let the angel whom thou still hast served Tell thee, Macduff was from his mother's womb Untimely ripp'd.	his mother's body

was from his mother's womb Untimely ripp'd.	Despair thy charm; And let the angel whom thou still hast served Tell thee, Macduff was from his mother's womb Untimely ripp'd.	was not naturally born.

keep the word of promise to our ear, And break it to our hope.	Accursed be that tongue that tells me so, For it hath cow'd my better part of man! And be these juggling fiends no more believed, That palter with us in a double sense; That keep the word of promise to our ear, And break it to our hope. I'll not fight with thee.	They promise us things that sound good, but then they don't deliver.

these juggling fiends	Accursed be that tongue that tells me so, For it hath cow'd my better part of man! And be these juggling fiends no more believed, That palter with us in a double sense; That keep the word of promise to our ear, And break it to our hope. I'll not fight with thee.	these deceiving devils

are, Painted on a pole, and underwrit, 'Here may you see the tyrant.'	Then yield thee, coward, And live to be the show and gaze o' the time: We'll have thee, as our rarer monsters are, Painted on a pole, and underwrit, 'Here may you see the tyrant.'	are, painted on a signpost with a caption saying, "Here you can see the tyrant."

the rabble's curse	I will not yield, To kiss the ground before young Malcolm's feet, And to be baited with the rabble's curse. Though Birnam wood be come to Dunsinane, And thou opposed, being of no woman born, Yet I will try the last.	The curses of the common people.

young Malcolm's feet	I will not yield, To kiss the ground before young Malcolm's feet, And to be baited with the rabble's curse. Though Birnam wood be come to Dunsinane, And thou opposed, being of no woman born, Yet I will try the last.	Malcolm's feet

kiss the ground before young Malcolm's feet, And to be baited with the rabble's curse.	I will not yield, To kiss the ground before young Malcolm's feet, And to be baited with the rabble's curse. Though Birnam wood be come to Dunsinane, And thou opposed, being of no woman born, Yet I will try the last.	To kneel before young Malcolm and be tormented by the curses of the common people.

Birnam wood	I will not yield, To kiss the ground before young Malcolm's feet, And to be baited with the rabble's curse. Though Birnam wood be come to Dunsinane, And thou opposed, being of no woman born, Yet I will try the last. Before my body I throw my warlike shield.	Birnam wood

throw my warlike shield.	Though Birnam wood be come to Dunsinane, And thou opposed, being of no woman born, Yet I will try the last. Before my body I throw my warlike shield. Lay on, Macduff, And damn'd be him that first cries, 'Hold, enough!'	I'll fight with my shield.

my warlike shield	Though Birnam wood be come to Dunsinane, And thou opposed, being of no woman born, Yet I will try the last. Before my body I throw my warlike shield. Lay on, Macduff, And damn'd be him that first cries, 'Hold, enough!'	My shield.

Lay on, Macduff, And damn'd be him that first cries, 'Hold, enough!'	Before my body I throw my warlike shield. Lay on, Macduff, And damn'd be him that first cries, 'Hold, enough!'	Keep fighting, Macduff, and cursed be the first one to say, "Stop! Enough!"

great a day as this is cheaply bought.	Some must go off: and yet, by these I see, So great a day as this is cheaply bought.	A day as important as this is worth the sacrifice.

station where he fought, But like a man he died.	Your son, my lord, has paid a soldier's debt: He only lived but till he was a man; The which no sooner had his prowess confirm'd In the unshrinking station where he fought, But like a man he died.	the place where he fought, but he died like a man.

a soldier's debt	Your son, my lord, has paid a soldier's debt: He only lived but till he was a man; The which no sooner had his prowess confirm'd In the unshrinking station where he fought, But like a man he died.	Died in battle.

the unshrinking station	Your son, my lord, has paid a soldier's debt: He only lived but till he was a man; The which no sooner had his prowess confirm'd In the unshrinking station where he fought, But like a man he died.	the place where he bravely stood his ground

his prowess confirm'd	Your son, my lord, has paid a soldier's debt: He only lived but till he was a man; The which no sooner had his prowess confirm'd In the unshrinking station where he fought, But like a man he died.	his bravery proven

cause of sorrow Must not be measured by his worth, for then It hath no end.	Ay, and brought off the field: your cause of sorrow Must not be measured by his worth, for then It hath no end.	Your sorrow shouldn't be based on how good he was, because then it will never end.

Ay, on the front.	Ay, on the front.	Yes, in front.

God's soldier	Why then, God's soldier be he! Had I as many sons as I have hairs, I would not wish them to a fairer death: And so, his knell is knoll'd.	God's soldier

Had I as many sons as I have hairs, I would not wish them to a fairer death: And so, his knell is knoll'd.	Why then, God's soldier be he! Had I as many sons as I have hairs, I would not wish them to a fairer death: And so, his knell is knoll'd.	If I had as many sons as I have hairs on my head, I wouldn't want them to die a more honorable death. And so, the death bell has been rung for him.

Hail, king!	Hail, king! for so thou art: behold, where stands The usurper's cursed head: the time is free: I see thee compass'd with thy kingdom's pearl, That speak my salutation in their minds; Whose voices I desire aloud with mine: Hail, King of Scotland!	Hello, King!

thee compass'd	Hail, king! for so thou art: behold, where stands The usurper's cursed head: the time is free: I see thee compass'd with thy kingdom's pearl, That speak my salutation in their minds; Whose voices I desire aloud with mine: Hail, King of Scotland!	surrounded by you

thy kingdom's pearl	Hail, king! for so thou art: behold, where stands The usurper's cursed head: the time is free: I see thee compass'd with thy kingdom's pearl, That speak my salutation in their minds; Whose voices I desire aloud with mine: Hail, King of Scotland!	The nobles of your kingdom.

The usurper's cursed head	Hail, king! for so thou art: behold, where stands The usurper's cursed head: the time is free: I see thee compass'd with thy kingdom's pearl, That speak my salutation in their minds; Whose voices I desire aloud with mine: Hail, King of Scotland!	The head of the cursed person who took the throne by force.

expense of time Before we reckon with your several loves, And make us even with you.	We shall not spend a large expense of time Before we reckon with your several loves, And make us even with you. My thanes and kinsmen, Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland In such an honour named.	spend much time before we reward your loyalty and repay you.

first that ever Scotland In such an honour named.	We shall not spend a large expense of time Before we reckon with your several loves, And make us even with you. My thanes and kinsmen, Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland In such an honour named. What's more to do, Which would be planted newly with the time, As calling home our exiled friends abroad That fled the snares of watchful tyranny; Producing forth the cruel ministers Of this dead butcher and his fiend-like queen, Who, as 'tis thought, by self and violent hands Took off her life; this, and what needful else That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace, We will perform in measure, time and place:	The first time Scotland has ever given out such titles.

such an honour	We shall not spend a large expense of time Before we reckon with your several loves, And make us even with you. My thanes and kinsmen, Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland In such an honour named. What's more to do, Which would be planted newly with the time, As calling home our exiled friends abroad That fled the snares of watchful tyranny; Producing forth the cruel ministers Of this dead butcher and his fiend-like queen, Who, as 'tis thought, by self and violent hands Took off her life; this, and what needful else That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace, We will perform in measure, time and place:	such an honor

his fiend-like queen	My thanes and kinsmen, Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland In such an honour named. What's more to do, Which would be planted newly with the time, As calling home our exiled friends abroad That fled the snares of watchful tyranny; Producing forth the cruel ministers Of this dead butcher and his fiend-like queen, Who, as 'tis thought, by self and violent hands Took off her life; this, and what needful else That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace, We will perform in measure, time and place: So, thanks to all at once and to each one, Whom we invite to see us crown'd at Scone.	his queen, who seemed like a demon

watchful tyranny	My thanes and kinsmen, Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland In such an honour named. What's more to do, Which would be planted newly with the time, As calling home our exiled friends abroad That fled the snares of watchful tyranny; Producing forth the cruel ministers Of this dead butcher and his fiend-like queen, Who, as 'tis thought, by self and violent hands Took off her life; this, and what needful else That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace, We will perform in measure, time and place: So, thanks to all at once and to each one, Whom we invite to see us crown'd at Scone.	Tyranny that was always watching.

'tis thought	My thanes and kinsmen, Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland In such an honour named. What's more to do, Which would be planted newly with the time, As calling home our exiled friends abroad That fled the snares of watchful tyranny; Producing forth the cruel ministers Of this dead butcher and his fiend-like queen, Who, as 'tis thought, by self and violent hands Took off her life; this, and what needful else That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace, We will perform in measure, time and place: So, thanks to all at once and to each one, Whom we invite to see us crown'd at Scone.	it is believed

this dead butcher	My thanes and kinsmen, Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland In such an honour named. What's more to do, Which would be planted newly with the time, As calling home our exiled friends abroad That fled the snares of watchful tyranny; Producing forth the cruel ministers Of this dead butcher and his fiend-like queen, Who, as 'tis thought, by self and violent hands Took off her life; this, and what needful else That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace, We will perform in measure, time and place: So, thanks to all at once and to each one, Whom we invite to see us crown'd at Scone.	this dead murderer

our exiled friends	My thanes and kinsmen, Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland In such an honour named. What's more to do, Which would be planted newly with the time, As calling home our exiled friends abroad That fled the snares of watchful tyranny; Producing forth the cruel ministers Of this dead butcher and his fiend-like queen, Who, as 'tis thought, by self and violent hands Took off her life; this, and what needful else That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace, We will perform in measure, time and place: So, thanks to all at once and to each one, Whom we invite to see us crown'd at Scone.	our friends who were forced to leave

the cruel ministers	My thanes and kinsmen, Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland In such an honour named. What's more to do, Which would be planted newly with the time, As calling home our exiled friends abroad That fled the snares of watchful tyranny; Producing forth the cruel ministers Of this dead butcher and his fiend-like queen, Who, as 'tis thought, by self and violent hands Took off her life; this, and what needful else That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace, We will perform in measure, time and place: So, thanks to all at once and to each one, Whom we invite to see us crown'd at Scone.	the brutal servants

by self and violent hands Took off her life; this, and what needful else That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace, We will perform in measure, time and place:	My thanes and kinsmen, Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland In such an honour named. What's more to do, Which would be planted newly with the time, As calling home our exiled friends abroad That fled the snares of watchful tyranny; Producing forth the cruel ministers Of this dead butcher and his fiend-like queen, Who, as 'tis thought, by self and violent hands Took off her life; this, and what needful else That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace, We will perform in measure, time and place: So, thanks to all at once and to each one, Whom we invite to see us crown'd at Scone.	killed herself violently. We will take care of this and anything else that needs to be done, with God's help, carefully, at the right time and place.

thanks to all at once and to each one, Whom we invite to see us crown'd at Scone.	What's more to do, Which would be planted newly with the time, As calling home our exiled friends abroad That fled the snares of watchful tyranny; Producing forth the cruel ministers Of this dead butcher and his fiend-like queen, Who, as 'tis thought, by self and violent hands Took off her life; this, and what needful else That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace, We will perform in measure, time and place: So, thanks to all at once and to each one, Whom we invite to see us crown'd at Scone.	Thank you all, we invite you to see us crowned at Scone.

thanks: ’tis bitter cold, And I am sick at heart.	For this relief much thanks: ’tis bitter cold, And I am sick at heart.	Thank you, but it's bitterly cold, and I'm heartbroken.

bitter cold	For this relief much thanks: ’tis bitter cold, And I am sick at heart.	very cold

Not a mouse stirring	Not a mouse stirring.	Not a mouse stirring.

rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.	Well, good night. If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus, The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.	Those who share my watch duty, tell them to hurry.

And liegemen	And liegemen to the Dane.	And loyal subjects

liegemen to the Dane.	And liegemen to the Dane.	Loyal to the Danish king.

O, farewell, honest soldier	O, farewell, honest soldier: Who hath relieved you?	Farewell, honest soldier.

soldier: Who hath relieved you?	O, farewell, honest soldier: Who hath relieved you?	Who has relieved you?

Holla! Bernardo	Holla! Bernardo!	Hey! Bernardo!

good Marcellus	Welcome, Horatio: welcome, good Marcellus.	Good Marcellus.

Horatio: welcome, good Marcellus.	Welcome, Horatio: welcome, good Marcellus.	Horatio, welcome! Good Marcellus, welcome!

appear’d again to-night?	What, has this thing appear’d again to-night?	Appeared again tonight?

this dreaded sight	Horatio says ’tis but our fantasy, And will not let belief take hold of him Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us: Therefore I have entreated him along With us to watch the minutes of this night; That if again this apparition come, He may approve our eyes and speak to it.	this scary ghost

take hold of him Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us: Therefore I have entreated him along With us to watch the minutes of this night; That if again this apparition come, He may approve our eyes and speak to it.	Horatio says ’tis but our fantasy, And will not let belief take hold of him Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us: Therefore I have entreated him along With us to watch the minutes of this night; That if again this apparition come, He may approve our eyes and speak to it.	believe what we've seen of this frightening ghost, which we've seen twice. That's why I've asked him to join us and watch tonight, so if the ghost appears again, he can confirm what we're seeing and talk to it.

Tush, tush	Tush, tush, ’twill not appear.	Nonsense, nonsense.

When yond same star	Last night of all, When yond same star that’s westward from the pole Had made his course to illume that part of heaven Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself, The bell then beating one—	When that same star

like the king that’s dead.	In the same figure, like the king that’s dead.	Like the dead king.

speak to it, Horatio.	Thou art a scholar; speak to it, Horatio.	Talk to it, Horatio.

harrows me with fear and wonder.	Most like: it harrows me with fear and wonder.	Fills me with fear and awe.

time of night, Together with that fair and warlike form In which the majesty of buried Denmark Did sometimes march?	What art thou that usurp’st this time of night, Together with that fair and warlike form In which the majesty of buried Denmark Did sometimes march? by heaven I charge thee, speak!	this time of night, along with that noble and warrior-like figure that the majestic dead king of Denmark used to appear in?

buried Denmark	What art thou that usurp’st this time of night, Together with that fair and warlike form In which the majesty of buried Denmark Did sometimes march? by heaven I charge thee, speak!	The dead king of Denmark

that fair and warlike form	What art thou that usurp’st this time of night, Together with that fair and warlike form In which the majesty of buried Denmark Did sometimes march? by heaven I charge thee, speak!	That beautiful and battle-ready figure.

stalks away!	See, it stalks away!	Walks away!

How now, Horatio	How now, Horatio! you tremble and look pale: Is not this something more than fantasy?	What's wrong, Horatio?

the sensible and true avouch	Before my God, I might not this believe Without the sensible and true avouch Of mine own eyes.	clear and truthful proof

believe Without the sensible and true avouch Of mine own eyes.	Before my God, I might not this believe Without the sensible and true avouch Of mine own eyes.	believe it if I hadn't seen it with my own eyes.

the sledded Polacks	As thou art to thyself: Such was the very armour he had on When he the ambitious Norway combated; So frown’d he once, when, in an angry parle, He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice. ’ Tis strange.	the Polish armies riding in sleds

the very armour	As thou art to thyself: Such was the very armour he had on When he the ambitious Norway combated; So frown’d he once, when, in an angry parle, He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice. ’ Tis strange.	the exact same armor

the ambitious Norway	As thou art to thyself: Such was the very armour he had on When he the ambitious Norway combated; So frown’d he once, when, in an angry parle, He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice. ’ Tis strange.	ambitious Norway

was the very armour he had on When he the ambitious Norway combated; So frown’d he once, when, in an angry parle, He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice. ’	As thou art to thyself: Such was the very armour he had on When he the ambitious Norway combated; So frown’d he once, when, in an angry parle, He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice. ’ Tis strange.	He wore the very same armor when he fought ambitious Norway. He frowned just like that once when he angrily struck down the Polish forces on the ice.

an angry parle	As thou art to thyself: Such was the very armour he had on When he the ambitious Norway combated; So frown’d he once, when, in an angry parle, He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice. ’ Tis strange.	an angry discussion

martial stalk	Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour, With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.	soldierly walk

jump at this dead hour, With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.	Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour, With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.	appeared suddenly at this dead of night, walking past our watch with a soldier's stride.

gross and scope of my opinion, This bodes some strange eruption to our state.	In what particular thought to work I know not; But in the gross and scope of my opinion, This bodes some strange eruption to our state.	overall, I think this means something bad is about to happen to our country.

some strange eruption	In what particular thought to work I know not; But in the gross and scope of my opinion, This bodes some strange eruption to our state.	some kind of trouble

this sweaty haste	Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows, Why this same strict and most observant watch So nightly toils the subject of the land, And why such daily cast of brazen cannon, And foreign mart for implements of war; Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task Does not divide the Sunday from the week; What might be toward, that this sweaty haste Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day: Who is’t that can inform me?	this frantic rush

the night joint-labourer	Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows, Why this same strict and most observant watch So nightly toils the subject of the land, And why such daily cast of brazen cannon, And foreign mart for implements of war; Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task Does not divide the Sunday from the week; What might be toward, that this sweaty haste Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day: Who is’t that can inform me?	makes people work day and night

brazen cannon	Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows, Why this same strict and most observant watch So nightly toils the subject of the land, And why such daily cast of brazen cannon, And foreign mart for implements of war; Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task Does not divide the Sunday from the week; What might be toward, that this sweaty haste Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day: Who is’t that can inform me?	bronze cannons

Why this same strict and most observant watch	Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows, Why this same strict and most observant watch So nightly toils the subject of the land, And why such daily cast of brazen cannon, And foreign mart for implements of war; Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task Does not divide the Sunday from the week; What might be toward, that this sweaty haste Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day: Who is’t that can inform me?	Why this constant and careful guard?

whose sore task	Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows, Why this same strict and most observant watch So nightly toils the subject of the land, And why such daily cast of brazen cannon, And foreign mart for implements of war; Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task Does not divide the Sunday from the week; What might be toward, that this sweaty haste Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day: Who is’t that can inform me?	whose difficult job

cast of brazen cannon, And foreign mart for implements of war; Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task Does not divide the Sunday from the week; What might be toward, that this sweaty haste Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day: Who is’t that can inform me?	Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows, Why this same strict and most observant watch So nightly toils the subject of the land, And why such daily cast of brazen cannon, And foreign mart for implements of war; Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task Does not divide the Sunday from the week; What might be toward, that this sweaty haste Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day: Who is’t that can inform me?	the casting of bronze cannons, and buying war supplies from other countries? Why are shipbuilders forced into service, working so hard they can't even rest on Sundays? What could be happening that causes this frantic rush, making people work day and night? Who can tell me what's going on?

king, Whose image even but now appear’d to us, Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,	That can I; At least, the whisper goes so. Our last king, Whose image even but now appear’d to us, Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway, Thereto prick’d on by a most emulate pride, Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet— For so this side of our known world esteem’d him— Did slay this Fortinbras; who, by a seal’d compact, Well ratified by law and heraldry, Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror: Against the which, a moiety competent Was gaged by our king; which had return’d To the inheritance of Fortinbras, Had he been vanquisher; as, by the same covenant, And carriage of the article design’d, His fell to Hamlet.	king, whose ghost just appeared to us, was, as you know, challenged by Fortinbras of Norway.

inheritance of Fortinbras, Had he been vanquisher; as, by the same covenant, And carriage of the article design’d, His fell to Hamlet.	Our last king, Whose image even but now appear’d to us, Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway, Thereto prick’d on by a most emulate pride, Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet— For so this side of our known world esteem’d him— Did slay this Fortinbras; who, by a seal’d compact, Well ratified by law and heraldry, Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror: Against the which, a moiety competent Was gaged by our king; which had return’d To the inheritance of Fortinbras, Had he been vanquisher; as, by the same covenant, And carriage of the article design’d, His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras, Of unimproved mettle hot and full, Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there Shark’d up a list of lawless resolutes, For food and diet, to some enterprise That hath a stomach in’t; which is no other— As it doth well appear unto our state— But to recover of us, by strong hand And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands So by his father lost: and this, I take it, Is the main motive of our preparations, The source of this our watch and the chief head Of this post-haste and romage in the land.	Fortinbras would have inherited them if he had won, but according to the agreement, they went to Hamlet because Hamlet won.

the article design’d	Our last king, Whose image even but now appear’d to us, Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway, Thereto prick’d on by a most emulate pride, Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet— For so this side of our known world esteem’d him— Did slay this Fortinbras; who, by a seal’d compact, Well ratified by law and heraldry, Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror: Against the which, a moiety competent Was gaged by our king; which had return’d To the inheritance of Fortinbras, Had he been vanquisher; as, by the same covenant, And carriage of the article design’d, His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras, Of unimproved mettle hot and full, Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there Shark’d up a list of lawless resolutes, For food and diet, to some enterprise That hath a stomach in’t; which is no other— As it doth well appear unto our state— But to recover of us, by strong hand And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands So by his father lost: and this, I take it, Is the main motive of our preparations, The source of this our watch and the chief head Of this post-haste and romage in the land.	the written agreement

the same covenant	Our last king, Whose image even but now appear’d to us, Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway, Thereto prick’d on by a most emulate pride, Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet— For so this side of our known world esteem’d him— Did slay this Fortinbras; who, by a seal’d compact, Well ratified by law and heraldry, Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror: Against the which, a moiety competent Was gaged by our king; which had return’d To the inheritance of Fortinbras, Had he been vanquisher; as, by the same covenant, And carriage of the article design’d, His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras, Of unimproved mettle hot and full, Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there Shark’d up a list of lawless resolutes, For food and diet, to some enterprise That hath a stomach in’t; which is no other— As it doth well appear unto our state— But to recover of us, by strong hand And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands So by his father lost: and this, I take it, Is the main motive of our preparations, The source of this our watch and the chief head Of this post-haste and romage in the land.	the same agreement

our valiant Hamlet	Our last king, Whose image even but now appear’d to us, Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway, Thereto prick’d on by a most emulate pride, Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet— For so this side of our known world esteem’d him— Did slay this Fortinbras; who, by a seal’d compact, Well ratified by law and heraldry, Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror: Against the which, a moiety competent Was gaged by our king; which had return’d To the inheritance of Fortinbras, Had he been vanquisher; as, by the same covenant, And carriage of the article design’d, His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras, Of unimproved mettle hot and full, Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there Shark’d up a list of lawless resolutes, For food and diet, to some enterprise That hath a stomach in’t; which is no other— As it doth well appear unto our state— But to recover of us, by strong hand And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands So by his father lost: and this, I take it, Is the main motive of our preparations, The source of this our watch and the chief head Of this post-haste and romage in the land.	our brave Hamlet

a most emulate pride	Our last king, Whose image even but now appear’d to us, Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway, Thereto prick’d on by a most emulate pride, Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet— For so this side of our known world esteem’d him— Did slay this Fortinbras; who, by a seal’d compact, Well ratified by law and heraldry, Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror: Against the which, a moiety competent Was gaged by our king; which had return’d To the inheritance of Fortinbras, Had he been vanquisher; as, by the same covenant, And carriage of the article design’d, His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras, Of unimproved mettle hot and full, Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there Shark’d up a list of lawless resolutes, For food and diet, to some enterprise That hath a stomach in’t; which is no other— As it doth well appear unto our state— But to recover of us, by strong hand And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands So by his father lost: and this, I take it, Is the main motive of our preparations, The source of this our watch and the chief head Of this post-haste and romage in the land.	A great and competitive pride

head Of this post-haste and romage in the land.	Thereto prick’d on by a most emulate pride, Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet— For so this side of our known world esteem’d him— Did slay this Fortinbras; who, by a seal’d compact, Well ratified by law and heraldry, Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror: Against the which, a moiety competent Was gaged by our king; which had return’d To the inheritance of Fortinbras, Had he been vanquisher; as, by the same covenant, And carriage of the article design’d, His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras, Of unimproved mettle hot and full, Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there Shark’d up a list of lawless resolutes, For food and diet, to some enterprise That hath a stomach in’t; which is no other— As it doth well appear unto our state— But to recover of us, by strong hand And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands So by his father lost: and this, I take it, Is the main motive of our preparations, The source of this our watch and the chief head Of this post-haste and romage in the land.	the reason for this frantic activity and commotion throughout the country.

young Fortinbras	Thereto prick’d on by a most emulate pride, Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet— For so this side of our known world esteem’d him— Did slay this Fortinbras; who, by a seal’d compact, Well ratified by law and heraldry, Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror: Against the which, a moiety competent Was gaged by our king; which had return’d To the inheritance of Fortinbras, Had he been vanquisher; as, by the same covenant, And carriage of the article design’d, His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras, Of unimproved mettle hot and full, Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there Shark’d up a list of lawless resolutes, For food and diet, to some enterprise That hath a stomach in’t; which is no other— As it doth well appear unto our state— But to recover of us, by strong hand And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands So by his father lost: and this, I take it, Is the main motive of our preparations, The source of this our watch and the chief head Of this post-haste and romage in the land.	young Fortinbras

unimproved mettle	Thereto prick’d on by a most emulate pride, Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet— For so this side of our known world esteem’d him— Did slay this Fortinbras; who, by a seal’d compact, Well ratified by law and heraldry, Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror: Against the which, a moiety competent Was gaged by our king; which had return’d To the inheritance of Fortinbras, Had he been vanquisher; as, by the same covenant, And carriage of the article design’d, His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras, Of unimproved mettle hot and full, Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there Shark’d up a list of lawless resolutes, For food and diet, to some enterprise That hath a stomach in’t; which is no other— As it doth well appear unto our state— But to recover of us, by strong hand And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands So by his father lost: and this, I take it, Is the main motive of our preparations, The source of this our watch and the chief head Of this post-haste and romage in the land.	untamed courage

the main motive	Thereto prick’d on by a most emulate pride, Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet— For so this side of our known world esteem’d him— Did slay this Fortinbras; who, by a seal’d compact, Well ratified by law and heraldry, Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror: Against the which, a moiety competent Was gaged by our king; which had return’d To the inheritance of Fortinbras, Had he been vanquisher; as, by the same covenant, And carriage of the article design’d, His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras, Of unimproved mettle hot and full, Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there Shark’d up a list of lawless resolutes, For food and diet, to some enterprise That hath a stomach in’t; which is no other— As it doth well appear unto our state— But to recover of us, by strong hand And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands So by his father lost: and this, I take it, Is the main motive of our preparations, The source of this our watch and the chief head Of this post-haste and romage in the land.	the primary reason

lawless resolutes	Thereto prick’d on by a most emulate pride, Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet— For so this side of our known world esteem’d him— Did slay this Fortinbras; who, by a seal’d compact, Well ratified by law and heraldry, Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror: Against the which, a moiety competent Was gaged by our king; which had return’d To the inheritance of Fortinbras, Had he been vanquisher; as, by the same covenant, And carriage of the article design’d, His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras, Of unimproved mettle hot and full, Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there Shark’d up a list of lawless resolutes, For food and diet, to some enterprise That hath a stomach in’t; which is no other— As it doth well appear unto our state— But to recover of us, by strong hand And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands So by his father lost: and this, I take it, Is the main motive of our preparations, The source of this our watch and the chief head Of this post-haste and romage in the land.	lawless, desperate men

those foresaid lands	Thereto prick’d on by a most emulate pride, Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet— For so this side of our known world esteem’d him— Did slay this Fortinbras; who, by a seal’d compact, Well ratified by law and heraldry, Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror: Against the which, a moiety competent Was gaged by our king; which had return’d To the inheritance of Fortinbras, Had he been vanquisher; as, by the same covenant, And carriage of the article design’d, His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras, Of unimproved mettle hot and full, Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there Shark’d up a list of lawless resolutes, For food and diet, to some enterprise That hath a stomach in’t; which is no other— As it doth well appear unto our state— But to recover of us, by strong hand And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands So by his father lost: and this, I take it, Is the main motive of our preparations, The source of this our watch and the chief head Of this post-haste and romage in the land.	those lands mentioned earlier

this portentous figure	I think it be no other but e’en so: Well may it sort that this portentous figure Comes armed through our watch; so like the king That was and is the question of these wars.	this ominous ghost

the mind’s eye	A mote it is to trouble the mind’s eye. In the most high and palmy state of Rome, A little ere the mightiest Julius fell, The graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets:	The imagination

mote it is to trouble the mind’s eye.	A mote it is to trouble the mind’s eye. In the most high and palmy state of Rome, A little ere the mightiest Julius fell, The graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets:	It's a tiny speck that bothers the mind.

the most high and palmy state	A mote it is to trouble the mind’s eye. In the most high and palmy state of Rome, A little ere the mightiest Julius fell, The graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets: As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood, Disasters in the sun; and the moist star Upon whose influence Neptune’s empire stands Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse: And even the like precurse of fierce events, As harbingers preceding still the fates And prologue to the omen coming on, Have heaven and earth together demonstrated Unto our climatures and countrymen.	the most powerful and flourishing state

the mightiest Julius	A mote it is to trouble the mind’s eye. In the most high and palmy state of Rome, A little ere the mightiest Julius fell, The graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets: As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood, Disasters in the sun; and the moist star Upon whose influence Neptune’s empire stands Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse: And even the like precurse of fierce events, As harbingers preceding still the fates And prologue to the omen coming on, Have heaven and earth together demonstrated Unto our climatures and countrymen.	The most powerful Julius Caesar

gibber in the Roman streets:	A mote it is to trouble the mind’s eye. In the most high and palmy state of Rome, A little ere the mightiest Julius fell, The graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets: As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood, Disasters in the sun; and the moist star Upon whose influence Neptune’s empire stands Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse: And even the like precurse of fierce events, As harbingers preceding still the fates And prologue to the omen coming on, Have heaven and earth together demonstrated Unto our climatures and countrymen.	made unintelligible noises in the streets of Rome

Neptune’s empire	In the most high and palmy state of Rome, A little ere the mightiest Julius fell, The graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets: As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood, Disasters in the sun; and the moist star Upon whose influence Neptune’s empire stands Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse: And even the like precurse of fierce events, As harbingers preceding still the fates And prologue to the omen coming on, Have heaven and earth together demonstrated Unto our climatures and countrymen. — But soft, behold!	The realm of the sea.

the moist star	In the most high and palmy state of Rome, A little ere the mightiest Julius fell, The graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets: As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood, Disasters in the sun; and the moist star Upon whose influence Neptune’s empire stands Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse: And even the like precurse of fierce events, As harbingers preceding still the fates And prologue to the omen coming on, Have heaven and earth together demonstrated Unto our climatures and countrymen. — But soft, behold!	the moon

fierce events	In the most high and palmy state of Rome, A little ere the mightiest Julius fell, The graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets: As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood, Disasters in the sun; and the moist star Upon whose influence Neptune’s empire stands Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse: And even the like precurse of fierce events, As harbingers preceding still the fates And prologue to the omen coming on, Have heaven and earth together demonstrated Unto our climatures and countrymen. — But soft, behold!	terrible events

trains of fire and dews of blood, Disasters in the sun; and the moist star Upon whose influence Neptune’s empire stands Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse: And even the like precurse of fierce events, As harbingers preceding still the fates And prologue to the omen coming on, Have heaven and earth together demonstrated Unto our climatures and countrymen.	In the most high and palmy state of Rome, A little ere the mightiest Julius fell, The graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets: As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood, Disasters in the sun; and the moist star Upon whose influence Neptune’s empire stands Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse: And even the like precurse of fierce events, As harbingers preceding still the fates And prologue to the omen coming on, Have heaven and earth together demonstrated Unto our climatures and countrymen. — But soft, behold!	Streams of fire, bloody dew, and problems with the sun; even the moon, which controls the sea, was nearly eclipsed until the end of time. Similarly, the heavens and earth have shown our land and people warnings of terrible events, like messengers announcing fate and a preview of the doom to come.

even the like precurse	In the most high and palmy state of Rome, A little ere the mightiest Julius fell, The graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets: As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood, Disasters in the sun; and the moist star Upon whose influence Neptune’s empire stands Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse: And even the like precurse of fierce events, As harbingers preceding still the fates And prologue to the omen coming on, Have heaven and earth together demonstrated Unto our climatures and countrymen. — But soft, behold!	just like these omens

hast any sound, or use of voice, Speak to me: If there be any good thing to be done, That may to thee do ease and grace to me, Speak to me: (Cock crows.)	Stay, illusion! If thou hast any sound, or use of voice, Speak to me: If there be any good thing to be done, That may to thee do ease and grace to me, Speak to me: (Cock crows.) If thou art privy to thy country’s fate, Which, happily, foreknowing may avoid, O, speak!	Do you have a voice? Speak to me. If there's anything good I can do that will help you and also benefit me, speak to me. (Cock crows.)

privy to thy country’s fate, Which, happily, foreknowing may avoid, O, speak!	If thou hast any sound, or use of voice, Speak to me: If there be any good thing to be done, That may to thee do ease and grace to me, Speak to me: (Cock crows.) If thou art privy to thy country’s fate, Which, happily, foreknowing may avoid, O, speak! Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life Extorted treasure in the womb of earth, For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death, Speak of it: stay, and speak!	If you know what's going to happen to our country, and knowing it might help us prevent something bad, please, tell us!

thy country’s fate	If thou hast any sound, or use of voice, Speak to me: If there be any good thing to be done, That may to thee do ease and grace to me, Speak to me: (Cock crows.) If thou art privy to thy country’s fate, Which, happily, foreknowing may avoid, O, speak! Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life Extorted treasure in the womb of earth, For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death, Speak of it: stay, and speak!	What will happen to your country

womb of earth, For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death, Speak of it: stay, and speak!	If thou art privy to thy country’s fate, Which, happily, foreknowing may avoid, O, speak! Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life Extorted treasure in the womb of earth, For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death, Speak of it: stay, and speak! Stop it, Marcellus.	buried in the ground. They say spirits often walk after death because of it. Tell us about it. Stay and speak!

strike at it with my partisan?	Shall I strike at it with my partisan?	Shall I strike at it with my spear?

do it wrong, being so majestical, To offer it the show of violence; For it is, as the air, invulnerable, And our vain blows malicious mockery.	(Exit Ghost.) We do it wrong, being so majestical, To offer it the show of violence; For it is, as the air, invulnerable, And our vain blows malicious mockery.	We're doing it wrong, acting so grand, to try and attack it. It's like the air, untouchable, and our pointless strikes are just a bad joke.

malicious mockery	(Exit Ghost.) We do it wrong, being so majestical, To offer it the show of violence; For it is, as the air, invulnerable, And our vain blows malicious mockery.	cruel joke

a fearful summons	And then it started like a guilty thing Upon a fearful summons. I have heard, The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn, Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat Awake the god of day; and, at his warning, Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air, The extravagant and erring spirit hies To his confine: and of the truth herein This present object made probation.	A scary call.

started like a guilty thing Upon a fearful summons.	And then it started like a guilty thing Upon a fearful summons. I have heard, The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn, Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat Awake the god of day; and, at his warning, Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air, The extravagant and erring spirit hies To his confine: and of the truth herein This present object made probation.	started like something guilty, when called with a frightening command.

his lofty and shrill-sounding throat	And then it started like a guilty thing Upon a fearful summons. I have heard, The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn, Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat Awake the god of day; and, at his warning, Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air, The extravagant and erring spirit hies To his confine: and of the truth herein This present object made probation.	his loud, high-pitched crow

The extravagant and erring spirit hies	And then it started like a guilty thing Upon a fearful summons. I have heard, The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn, Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat Awake the god of day; and, at his warning, Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air, The extravagant and erring spirit hies To his confine: and of the truth herein This present object made probation.	The wandering spirit hurries

in sea or fire, in earth or air, The extravagant and erring spirit hies To his confine: and of the truth herein This present object made probation.	And then it started like a guilty thing Upon a fearful summons. I have heard, The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn, Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat Awake the god of day; and, at his warning, Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air, The extravagant and erring spirit hies To his confine: and of the truth herein This present object made probation.	whether in sea or fire, in earth or air, the wandering and straying ghost hurries back to its prison. And this event proves that is true.

crowing of the cock.	It faded on the crowing of the cock. Some say that ever ’gainst that season comes Wherein our Saviour’s birth is celebrated, The bird of dawning singeth all night long: And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad; The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike, No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,	the rooster's crow.

our Saviour’s birth	It faded on the crowing of the cock. Some say that ever ’gainst that season comes Wherein our Saviour’s birth is celebrated, The bird of dawning singeth all night long: And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad; The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike, No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm, So hallow’d and so gracious is the time.	Jesus's birthday

bird of dawning singeth all night long: And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad; The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike, No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,	It faded on the crowing of the cock. Some say that ever ’gainst that season comes Wherein our Saviour’s birth is celebrated, The bird of dawning singeth all night long: And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad; The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike, No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm, So hallow’d and so gracious is the time.	the rooster sings all night long. People say that no ghost dares to walk around then; the nights are healthy; the planets have no power to harm, no fairy can steal you, and no witch can cast spells.

russet mantle	So have I heard and do in part believe it. But, look, the morn, in russet mantle clad, Walks o’er the dew of yon high eastward hill: Break we our watch up; and by my advice, Let us impart what we have seen to-night Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life, This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him. Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it, As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?	brown cloak

young Hamlet	So have I heard and do in part believe it. But, look, the morn, in russet mantle clad, Walks o’er the dew of yon high eastward hill: Break we our watch up; and by my advice, Let us impart what we have seen to-night Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life, This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him. Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it, As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?	young Hamlet

dumb to us, will speak to him.	So have I heard and do in part believe it. But, look, the morn, in russet mantle clad, Walks o’er the dew of yon high eastward hill: Break we our watch up; and by my advice, Let us impart what we have seen to-night Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life, This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him. Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it, As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?	it won't talk to us, but it will talk to him.

high eastward hill	So have I heard and do in part believe it. But, look, the morn, in russet mantle clad, Walks o’er the dew of yon high eastward hill: Break we our watch up; and by my advice, Let us impart what we have seen to-night Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life, This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him. Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it, As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?	high hill in the east

acquaint him with it, As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?	But, look, the morn, in russet mantle clad, Walks o’er the dew of yon high eastward hill: Break we our watch up; and by my advice, Let us impart what we have seen to-night Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life, This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him. Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it, As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?	Should we tell him about this? It's important because we care about him, and it's the right thing to do.

pray; and I this morning know Where we shall find him most conveniently.	Let’s do’t, I pray; and I this morning know Where we shall find him most conveniently. (Exeunt.)	Please, let's do it; I know where we can find him easily this morning.

so far hath discretion	Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother’s death The memory be green, and that it us befitted To bear our hearts in grief and our whole kingdom To be contracted in one brow of woe, Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature That we with wisest sorrow think on him, Together with remembrance of ourselves. Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen, The imperial jointress to this warlike state, Have we, as ’twere with a defeated joy— With an auspicious and a dropping eye, With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage, In equal scale weighing delight and dole— Taken to wife: nor have we herein barr’d Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone With this affair along.	We have been wise enough.

our dear brother’s death	Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother’s death The memory be green, and that it us befitted To bear our hearts in grief and our whole kingdom To be contracted in one brow of woe, Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature That we with wisest sorrow think on him, Together with remembrance of ourselves. Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen, The imperial jointress to this warlike state, Have we, as ’twere with a defeated joy— With an auspicious and a dropping eye, With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage, In equal scale weighing delight and dole— Taken to wife: nor have we herein barr’d Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone With this affair along.	the death of our dear brother

wisest sorrow	Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother’s death The memory be green, and that it us befitted To bear our hearts in grief and our whole kingdom To be contracted in one brow of woe, Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature That we with wisest sorrow think on him, Together with remembrance of ourselves. Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen, The imperial jointress to this warlike state, Have we, as ’twere with a defeated joy— With an auspicious and a dropping eye, With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage, In equal scale weighing delight and dole— Taken to wife: nor have we herein barr’d Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone With this affair along.	intelligent grief

contracted in one brow of woe, Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature That we with wisest sorrow think on him, Together with remembrance of ourselves.	Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother’s death The memory be green, and that it us befitted To bear our hearts in grief and our whole kingdom To be contracted in one brow of woe, Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature That we with wisest sorrow think on him, Together with remembrance of ourselves. Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen, The imperial jointress to this warlike state, Have we, as ’twere with a defeated joy— With an auspicious and a dropping eye, With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage, In equal scale weighing delight and dole— Taken to wife: nor have we herein barr’d Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone With this affair along.	our whole kingdom to be frowning with grief. But we've used our judgment to overcome our natural feelings so we can remember him with wise sorrow, while also considering our own situation.

one brow	Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother’s death The memory be green, and that it us befitted To bear our hearts in grief and our whole kingdom To be contracted in one brow of woe, Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature That we with wisest sorrow think on him, Together with remembrance of ourselves. Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen, The imperial jointress to this warlike state, Have we, as ’twere with a defeated joy— With an auspicious and a dropping eye, With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage, In equal scale weighing delight and dole— Taken to wife: nor have we herein barr’d Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone With this affair along.	united in sadness

The imperial jointress	Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother’s death The memory be green, and that it us befitted To bear our hearts in grief and our whole kingdom To be contracted in one brow of woe, Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature That we with wisest sorrow think on him, Together with remembrance of ourselves. Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen, The imperial jointress to this warlike state, Have we, as ’twere with a defeated joy— With an auspicious and a dropping eye, With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage, In equal scale weighing delight and dole— Taken to wife: nor have we herein barr’d Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone With this affair along. For all, our thanks.	The queen, who now jointly rules this powerful kingdom

jointress to this warlike state, Have we, as ’twere with a defeated joy— With an auspicious and a dropping eye, With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage, In equal scale weighing delight and dole— Taken to wife: nor have we herein barr’d Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone With this affair along.	Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother’s death The memory be green, and that it us befitted To bear our hearts in grief and our whole kingdom To be contracted in one brow of woe, Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature That we with wisest sorrow think on him, Together with remembrance of ourselves. Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen, The imperial jointress to this warlike state, Have we, as ’twere with a defeated joy— With an auspicious and a dropping eye, With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage, In equal scale weighing delight and dole— Taken to wife: nor have we herein barr’d Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone With this affair along. For all, our thanks.	Taken as my wife—it was like a joy mixed with sadness, a hopeful yet tearful occasion, a funeral with laughter and a wedding with mourning, balancing happiness and sorrow equally. We didn't ignore your advice, and we appreciate your support in this marriage.

this warlike state	Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother’s death The memory be green, and that it us befitted To bear our hearts in grief and our whole kingdom To be contracted in one brow of woe, Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature That we with wisest sorrow think on him, Together with remembrance of ourselves. Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen, The imperial jointress to this warlike state, Have we, as ’twere with a defeated joy— With an auspicious and a dropping eye, With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage, In equal scale weighing delight and dole— Taken to wife: nor have we herein barr’d Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone With this affair along. For all, our thanks.	this powerful kingdom

our sometime sister	Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother’s death The memory be green, and that it us befitted To bear our hearts in grief and our whole kingdom To be contracted in one brow of woe, Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature That we with wisest sorrow think on him, Together with remembrance of ourselves. Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen, The imperial jointress to this warlike state, Have we, as ’twere with a defeated joy— With an auspicious and a dropping eye, With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage, In equal scale weighing delight and dole— Taken to wife: nor have we herein barr’d Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone With this affair along. For all, our thanks.	formerly our sister

our most valiant brother	For all, our thanks. Now follows, that you know, young Fortinbras, Holding a weak supposal of our worth, Or thinking by our late dear brother’s death Our state to be disjoint and out of frame, Colleagued with the dream of his advantage, He hath not fail’d to pester us with message, Importing the surrender of those lands Lost by his father, with all bonds of law, To our most valiant brother. So much for him.	Our brave brother.

a weak supposal	For all, our thanks. Now follows, that you know, young Fortinbras, Holding a weak supposal of our worth, Or thinking by our late dear brother’s death Our state to be disjoint and out of frame, Colleagued with the dream of his advantage, He hath not fail’d to pester us with message, Importing the surrender of those lands Lost by his father, with all bonds of law, To our most valiant brother. So much for him.	a low opinion

our late dear brother’s death	For all, our thanks. Now follows, that you know, young Fortinbras, Holding a weak supposal of our worth, Or thinking by our late dear brother’s death Our state to be disjoint and out of frame, Colleagued with the dream of his advantage, He hath not fail’d to pester us with message, Importing the surrender of those lands Lost by his father, with all bonds of law, To our most valiant brother. So much for him.	the recent death of our beloved brother

bonds of law, To our most valiant brother.	For all, our thanks. Now follows, that you know, young Fortinbras, Holding a weak supposal of our worth, Or thinking by our late dear brother’s death Our state to be disjoint and out of frame, Colleagued with the dream of his advantage, He hath not fail’d to pester us with message, Importing the surrender of those lands Lost by his father, with all bonds of law, To our most valiant brother. So much for him.	Legally bound to our brave brother.

good Cornelius	So much for him. Now for ourself and for this time of meeting: Thus much the business is: we have here writ To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras— Who, impotent and bed-rid, scarcely hears Of this his nephew’s purpose—to suppress His further gait herein; in that the levies, The lists and full proportions, are all made Out of his subject: and we here dispatch You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltimand, For bearers of this greeting to old Norway; Giving to you no further personal power To business with the king, more than the scope Of these delated articles allow. Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.	Good Cornelius.

here writ	So much for him. Now for ourself and for this time of meeting: Thus much the business is: we have here writ To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras— Who, impotent and bed-rid, scarcely hears Of this his nephew’s purpose—to suppress His further gait herein; in that the levies, The lists and full proportions, are all made Out of his subject: and we here dispatch You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltimand, For bearers of this greeting to old Norway; Giving to you no further personal power To business with the king, more than the scope Of these delated articles allow. Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.	have written

Out of his subject: and we here dispatch You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltimand, For bearers of this greeting to old Norway; Giving to you no further personal power To business with the king, more than the scope Of these delated articles allow.	So much for him. Now for ourself and for this time of meeting: Thus much the business is: we have here writ To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras— Who, impotent and bed-rid, scarcely hears Of this his nephew’s purpose—to suppress His further gait herein; in that the levies, The lists and full proportions, are all made Out of his subject: and we here dispatch You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltimand, For bearers of this greeting to old Norway; Giving to you no further personal power To business with the king, more than the scope Of these delated articles allow. Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.	These troops were raised from his people. And we are sending you, good Cornelius, and you, Voltimand, to deliver this message to old Norway. You have no authority to discuss anything with the king beyond what's written in these instructions.

His further gait	So much for him. Now for ourself and for this time of meeting: Thus much the business is: we have here writ To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras— Who, impotent and bed-rid, scarcely hears Of this his nephew’s purpose—to suppress His further gait herein; in that the levies, The lists and full proportions, are all made Out of his subject: and we here dispatch You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltimand, For bearers of this greeting to old Norway; Giving to you no further personal power To business with the king, more than the scope Of these delated articles allow. Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.	His further actions

young Fortinbras	So much for him. Now for ourself and for this time of meeting: Thus much the business is: we have here writ To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras— Who, impotent and bed-rid, scarcely hears Of this his nephew’s purpose—to suppress His further gait herein; in that the levies, The lists and full proportions, are all made Out of his subject: and we here dispatch You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltimand, For bearers of this greeting to old Norway; Giving to you no further personal power To business with the king, more than the scope Of these delated articles allow. Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.	young Fortinbras

these delated articles	So much for him. Now for ourself and for this time of meeting: Thus much the business is: we have here writ To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras— Who, impotent and bed-rid, scarcely hears Of this his nephew’s purpose—to suppress His further gait herein; in that the levies, The lists and full proportions, are all made Out of his subject: and we here dispatch You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltimand, For bearers of this greeting to old Norway; Giving to you no further personal power To business with the king, more than the scope Of these delated articles allow. Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.	these detailed instructions

this his nephew’s purpose	So much for him. Now for ourself and for this time of meeting: Thus much the business is: we have here writ To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras— Who, impotent and bed-rid, scarcely hears Of this his nephew’s purpose—to suppress His further gait herein; in that the levies, The lists and full proportions, are all made Out of his subject: and we here dispatch You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltimand, For bearers of this greeting to old Norway; Giving to you no further personal power To business with the king, more than the scope Of these delated articles allow. Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.	what his nephew intends to do

(Exeunt Voltimand	We doubt it nothing: heartily farewell. (Exeunt Voltimand and Cornelius.) And now, Laertes, what’s the news with you?	(Voltimand and Cornelius exit.)

And now, Laertes	(Exeunt Voltimand and Cornelius.) And now, Laertes, what’s the news with you? You told us of some suit; what is’t, Laertes?	And now, Laertes

told us of some suit; what is’t, Laertes?	And now, Laertes, what’s the news with you? You told us of some suit; what is’t, Laertes? You cannot speak of reason to the Dane, And lose your voice: what wouldst thou beg, Laertes, That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?	You mentioned you wanted to ask something; what is it?

speak of reason to the Dane, And lose your voice: what wouldst thou beg, Laertes, That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?	You told us of some suit; what is’t, Laertes? You cannot speak of reason to the Dane, And lose your voice: what wouldst thou beg, Laertes, That shall not be my offer, not thy asking? The head is not more native to the heart, The hand more instrumental to the mouth, Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.	Trying to argue with the King is pointless. What is it you want, Laertes, that I wouldn't give you without you even having to ask?

throne of Denmark to thy father.	You cannot speak of reason to the Dane, And lose your voice: what wouldst thou beg, Laertes, That shall not be my offer, not thy asking? The head is not more native to the heart, The hand more instrumental to the mouth, Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father. What wouldst thou have, Laertes?	The throne of Denmark is devoted to your father.

, Laertes	The head is not more native to the heart, The hand more instrumental to the mouth, Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father. What wouldst thou have, Laertes?	Laertes?

your gracious leave	My dread lord, Your leave and favour to return to France; From whence though willingly I came to Denmark, To show my duty in your coronation, Yet now, I must confess, that duty done, My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.	Your kind permission.

bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.	My dread lord, Your leave and favour to return to France; From whence though willingly I came to Denmark, To show my duty in your coronation, Yet now, I must confess, that duty done, My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.	humbly ask for your permission and forgiveness.

last Upon his will I seal’d my hard consent: I do beseech you, give him leave to go.	He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave By laboursome petition, and at last Upon his will I seal’d my hard consent: I do beseech you, give him leave to go.	Finally, I reluctantly agreed to his wishes. I beg you, allow him to leave.

laboursome petition	He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave By laboursome petition, and at last Upon his will I seal’d my hard consent: I do beseech you, give him leave to go.	Tiresome request

spend it at thy will!	Take thy fair hour, Laertes; time be thine, And thy best graces spend it at thy will! But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son—	Do what you want with your time!

But now, my cousin Hamlet	Take thy fair hour, Laertes; time be thine, And thy best graces spend it at thy will! But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son—	But now, my relative Hamlet

more than kin, and less than kind.	(Aside.) A little more than kin, and less than kind.	Too closely related, and not friendly.

look like a friend on Denmark.	Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off, And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark. Do not for ever with thy vailed lids Seek for thy noble father in the dust:	Smile on Denmark.

thy nighted colour	Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off, And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark. Do not for ever with thy vailed lids Seek for thy noble father in the dust:	your dark mood

for ever with thy vailed lids Seek for thy noble father in the dust:	Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off, And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark. Do not for ever with thy vailed lids Seek for thy noble father in the dust: Thou know’st ’tis common; all that lives must die, Passing through nature to eternity.	Don't constantly look down, searching for your dead father in the ground.

thy vailed lids	Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off, And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark. Do not for ever with thy vailed lids Seek for thy noble father in the dust: Thou know’st ’tis common; all that lives must die, Passing through nature to eternity.	Your downcast eyes.

Passing through nature to eternity.	Do not for ever with thy vailed lids Seek for thy noble father in the dust: Thou know’st ’tis common; all that lives must die, Passing through nature to eternity.	Going from life to death.

shapes of grief, That can denote me truly: these indeed seem, For they are actions that a man might play: But I have that within which passeth show; These but the trappings and the suits of woe.	nay, it is; I know not “seems.” ’Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother, Nor customary suits of solemn black, Nor windy suspiration of forced breath, No, nor the fruitful river in the eye, Nor the dejected ’havior of the visage, Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief, That can denote me truly: these indeed seem, For they are actions that a man might play: But I have that within which passeth show; These but the trappings and the suits of woe.	forms of grief that can truly show who I am. These things only appear to be grief, because they are actions someone could fake. But what I feel inside goes beyond what anyone can see. These outward displays are just the decorations and clothes of sorrow.

the fruitful river	nay, it is; I know not “seems.” ’Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother, Nor customary suits of solemn black, Nor windy suspiration of forced breath, No, nor the fruitful river in the eye, Nor the dejected ’havior of the visage, Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief, That can denote me truly: these indeed seem, For they are actions that a man might play: But I have that within which passeth show; These but the trappings and the suits of woe.	Tears.

customary suits	nay, it is; I know not “seems.” ’Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother, Nor customary suits of solemn black, Nor windy suspiration of forced breath, No, nor the fruitful river in the eye, Nor the dejected ’havior of the visage, Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief, That can denote me truly: these indeed seem, For they are actions that a man might play: But I have that within which passeth show; These but the trappings and the suits of woe.	Normal, everyday clothes.

solemn black	nay, it is; I know not “seems.” ’Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother, Nor customary suits of solemn black, Nor windy suspiration of forced breath, No, nor the fruitful river in the eye, Nor the dejected ’havior of the visage, Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief, That can denote me truly: these indeed seem, For they are actions that a man might play: But I have that within which passeth show; These but the trappings and the suits of woe.	Formal black clothing.

windy suspiration	nay, it is; I know not “seems.” ’Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother, Nor customary suits of solemn black, Nor windy suspiration of forced breath, No, nor the fruitful river in the eye, Nor the dejected ’havior of the visage, Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief, That can denote me truly: these indeed seem, For they are actions that a man might play: But I have that within which passeth show; These but the trappings and the suits of woe.	Sighing deeply.

filial obligation	’Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet, To give these mourning duties to your father: But, you must know, your father lost a father; That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound In filial obligation for some term To do obsequious sorrow: but to persever In obstinate condolement is a course Of impious stubbornness; ’tis unmanly grief; It shows a will most incorrect to heaven, A heart unfortified, a mind impatient, An understanding simple and unschool’d: For what we know must be and is as common As any the most vulgar thing to sense, Why should we in our peevish opposition Take it to heart? Fie! ’	duty as a son

impious stubbornness	’Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet, To give these mourning duties to your father: But, you must know, your father lost a father; That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound In filial obligation for some term To do obsequious sorrow: but to persever In obstinate condolement is a course Of impious stubbornness; ’tis unmanly grief; It shows a will most incorrect to heaven, A heart unfortified, a mind impatient, An understanding simple and unschool’d: For what we know must be and is as common As any the most vulgar thing to sense, Why should we in our peevish opposition Take it to heart? Fie! ’	wicked stubbornness

we in our peevish opposition Take it to heart?	’Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet, To give these mourning duties to your father: But, you must know, your father lost a father; That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound In filial obligation for some term To do obsequious sorrow: but to persever In obstinate condolement is a course Of impious stubbornness; ’tis unmanly grief; It shows a will most incorrect to heaven, A heart unfortified, a mind impatient, An understanding simple and unschool’d: For what we know must be and is as common As any the most vulgar thing to sense, Why should we in our peevish opposition Take it to heart? Fie! ’	Why should we stubbornly take it so hard?

our peevish opposition	’Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet, To give these mourning duties to your father: But, you must know, your father lost a father; That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound In filial obligation for some term To do obsequious sorrow: but to persever In obstinate condolement is a course Of impious stubbornness; ’tis unmanly grief; It shows a will most incorrect to heaven, A heart unfortified, a mind impatient, An understanding simple and unschool’d: For what we know must be and is as common As any the most vulgar thing to sense, Why should we in our peevish opposition Take it to heart? Fie! ’	your stubborn resistance

any the most vulgar thing	’Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet, To give these mourning duties to your father: But, you must know, your father lost a father; That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound In filial obligation for some term To do obsequious sorrow: but to persever In obstinate condolement is a course Of impious stubbornness; ’tis unmanly grief; It shows a will most incorrect to heaven, A heart unfortified, a mind impatient, An understanding simple and unschool’d: For what we know must be and is as common As any the most vulgar thing to sense, Why should we in our peevish opposition Take it to heart? Fie! ’	anything common

unmanly grief	’Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet, To give these mourning duties to your father: But, you must know, your father lost a father; That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound In filial obligation for some term To do obsequious sorrow: but to persever In obstinate condolement is a course Of impious stubbornness; ’tis unmanly grief; It shows a will most incorrect to heaven, A heart unfortified, a mind impatient, An understanding simple and unschool’d: For what we know must be and is as common As any the most vulgar thing to sense, Why should we in our peevish opposition Take it to heart? Fie! ’	unmanly grief

these mourning duties	’Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet, To give these mourning duties to your father: But, you must know, your father lost a father; That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound In filial obligation for some term To do obsequious sorrow: but to persever In obstinate condolement is a course Of impious stubbornness; ’tis unmanly grief; It shows a will most incorrect to heaven, A heart unfortified, a mind impatient, An understanding simple and unschool’d: For what we know must be and is as common As any the most vulgar thing to sense, Why should we in our peevish opposition Take it to heart? Fie! ’	this mourning

obstinate condolement	’Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet, To give these mourning duties to your father: But, you must know, your father lost a father; That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound In filial obligation for some term To do obsequious sorrow: but to persever In obstinate condolement is a course Of impious stubbornness; ’tis unmanly grief; It shows a will most incorrect to heaven, A heart unfortified, a mind impatient, An understanding simple and unschool’d: For what we know must be and is as common As any the most vulgar thing to sense, Why should we in our peevish opposition Take it to heart? Fie! ’	stubborn grieving

obsequious sorrow	’Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet, To give these mourning duties to your father: But, you must know, your father lost a father; That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound In filial obligation for some term To do obsequious sorrow: but to persever In obstinate condolement is a course Of impious stubbornness; ’tis unmanly grief; It shows a will most incorrect to heaven, A heart unfortified, a mind impatient, An understanding simple and unschool’d: For what we know must be and is as common As any the most vulgar thing to sense, Why should we in our peevish opposition Take it to heart? Fie! ’	ceremonial mourning

the first corse	Fie! ’ tis a fault to heaven, A fault against the dead, a fault to nature, To reason most absurd; whose common theme Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried, From the first corse till he that died to-day, “This must be so.” We pray you, throw to earth This unprevailing woe, and think of us As of a father: for let the world take note, You are the most immediate to our throne; And with no less nobility of love Than that which dearest father bears his son, Do I impart toward you.	the first dead body

death of fathers, and who still hath cried, From the first corse till he that died to-day, “This must be so.”	Fie! ’ tis a fault to heaven, A fault against the dead, a fault to nature, To reason most absurd; whose common theme Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried, From the first corse till he that died to-day, “This must be so.” We pray you, throw to earth This unprevailing woe, and think of us As of a father: for let the world take note, You are the most immediate to our throne; And with no less nobility of love Than that which dearest father bears his son, Do I impart toward you.	fathers die, and everyone has always said, from the first death until today, "This is how it is."

no less nobility	tis a fault to heaven, A fault against the dead, a fault to nature, To reason most absurd; whose common theme Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried, From the first corse till he that died to-day, “This must be so.” We pray you, throw to earth This unprevailing woe, and think of us As of a father: for let the world take note, You are the most immediate to our throne; And with no less nobility of love Than that which dearest father bears his son, Do I impart toward you. For your intent In going back to school in Wittenberg, It is most retrograde to our desire:	equal love

are the most immediate to our throne; And with no less nobility of love Than that which dearest father bears his son, Do I impart toward you.	tis a fault to heaven, A fault against the dead, a fault to nature, To reason most absurd; whose common theme Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried, From the first corse till he that died to-day, “This must be so.” We pray you, throw to earth This unprevailing woe, and think of us As of a father: for let the world take note, You are the most immediate to our throne; And with no less nobility of love Than that which dearest father bears his son, Do I impart toward you. For your intent In going back to school in Wittenberg, It is most retrograde to our desire:	are next in line to be king; and I give you as much love as the most loving father gives his son.

dearest father	tis a fault to heaven, A fault against the dead, a fault to nature, To reason most absurd; whose common theme Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried, From the first corse till he that died to-day, “This must be so.” We pray you, throw to earth This unprevailing woe, and think of us As of a father: for let the world take note, You are the most immediate to our throne; And with no less nobility of love Than that which dearest father bears his son, Do I impart toward you. For your intent In going back to school in Wittenberg, It is most retrograde to our desire:	most beloved father

This unprevailing woe	tis a fault to heaven, A fault against the dead, a fault to nature, To reason most absurd; whose common theme Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried, From the first corse till he that died to-day, “This must be so.” We pray you, throw to earth This unprevailing woe, and think of us As of a father: for let the world take note, You are the most immediate to our throne; And with no less nobility of love Than that which dearest father bears his son, Do I impart toward you. For your intent In going back to school in Wittenberg, It is most retrograde to our desire:	This useless grief

going back to school in Wittenberg, It is most retrograde to our desire:	We pray you, throw to earth This unprevailing woe, and think of us As of a father: for let the world take note, You are the most immediate to our throne; And with no less nobility of love Than that which dearest father bears his son, Do I impart toward you. For your intent In going back to school in Wittenberg, It is most retrograde to our desire: And we beseech you, bend you to remain Here, in the cheer and comfort of our eye, Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.	Going back to school in Wittenberg is the opposite of what we want.

remain Here, in the cheer and comfort of our eye, Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.	For your intent In going back to school in Wittenberg, It is most retrograde to our desire: And we beseech you, bend you to remain Here, in the cheer and comfort of our eye, Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.	Stay here with us, where we can see you and be happy, as our most important advisor, relative, and son.

prayers, Hamlet: I pray thee, stay with us; go not to Wittenberg.	Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet: I pray thee, stay with us; go not to Wittenberg.	prayers, Hamlet: Please, stay with us; don't go to Wittenberg.

obey you, madam.	I shall in all my best obey you, madam.	obey you, madam.

Be as ourself in Denmark.	Why, ’tis a loving and a fair reply: Be as ourself in Denmark. Madam, come; This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet Sits smiling to my heart: in grace whereof, No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day, But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell, And the king’s rouse the heavens shall bruit again, Re-speaking earthly thunder.	Act as if you were me in Denmark.

Re-speaking earthly thunder	Why, ’tis a loving and a fair reply: Be as ourself in Denmark. Madam, come; This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet Sits smiling to my heart: in grace whereof, No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day, But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell, And the king’s rouse the heavens shall bruit again, Re-speaking earthly thunder. Come away.	Echoing the thunder on Earth.

This gentle and unforced accord	Why, ’tis a loving and a fair reply: Be as ourself in Denmark. Madam, come; This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet Sits smiling to my heart: in grace whereof, No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day, But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell, And the king’s rouse the heavens shall bruit again, Re-speaking earthly thunder. Come away.	This kind and willing agreement

, No jocund health	Why, ’tis a loving and a fair reply: Be as ourself in Denmark. Madam, come; This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet Sits smiling to my heart: in grace whereof, No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day, But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell, And the king’s rouse the heavens shall bruit again, Re-speaking earthly thunder. Come away.	No joyful toast

whereof, No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day, But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell, And the king’s rouse the heavens shall bruit again, Re-speaking earthly thunder.	Why, ’tis a loving and a fair reply: Be as ourself in Denmark. Madam, come; This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet Sits smiling to my heart: in grace whereof, No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day, But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell, And the king’s rouse the heavens shall bruit again, Re-speaking earthly thunder. Come away.	And to celebrate this, every toast drunk in Denmark today will be marked by cannon fire reaching the clouds, and the King's celebratory drinks will echo through the heavens like thunder.

all but Hamlet.)	Come away. (Exeunt all but Hamlet.)	Everyone leaves except for Hamlet.

resolve itself into a dew!	O, that this too too solid flesh would melt, Thaw and resolve itself into a dew! Or that the Everlasting had not fix’d His canon ’gainst self-slaughter!	dissolve into a teardrop!

canon ’gainst self-slaughter!	O, that this too too solid flesh would melt, Thaw and resolve itself into a dew! Or that the Everlasting had not fix’d His canon ’gainst self-slaughter! O God!	law against suicide!

Fie on’t	How weary, stale, flat and unprofitable, Seem to me all the uses of this world! Fie on’t! ah fie! ’tis an unweeded garden, That grows to seed; things rank and gross in nature	Damn it.

ah fie! ’tis	Fie on’t! ah fie! ’tis an unweeded garden, That grows to seed; things rank and gross in nature Possess it merely.	Oh, shame! It is.

an unweeded garden	Fie on’t! ah fie! ’tis an unweeded garden, That grows to seed; things rank and gross in nature Possess it merely.	a garden full of weeds

excellent a king; that was, to this, Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother That he might not beteem the winds of heaven Visit her face too roughly.	That it should come to this! But two months dead: nay, not so much, not two: So excellent a king; that was, to this, Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother That he might not beteem the winds of heaven Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth!	Such a wonderful king, compared to this one, was like a god compared to a beast. He loved my mother so much that he wouldn't even let the wind touch her face too harshly.

grown By what it fed on: and yet, within a month— Let me not think on’t—Frailty, thy name is woman!—	Must I remember? why, she would hang on him, As if increase of appetite had grown By what it fed on: and yet, within a month— Let me not think on’t—Frailty, thy name is woman!— A little month, or ere those shoes were old With which she follow’d my poor father’s body, Like Niobe,	increased by what it consumed; and yet, within a month—I don't want to think about it—weakness, you are a woman!

body, Like Niobe,	why, she would hang on him, As if increase of appetite had grown By what it fed on: and yet, within a month— Let me not think on’t—Frailty, thy name is woman!— A little month, or ere those shoes were old With which she follow’d my poor father’s body, Like Niobe, all tears:—why she, even she— O, God!	body, like a weeping statue,

my poor father’s body	why, she would hang on him, As if increase of appetite had grown By what it fed on: and yet, within a month— Let me not think on’t—Frailty, thy name is woman!— A little month, or ere those shoes were old With which she follow’d my poor father’s body, Like Niobe, all tears:—why she, even she— O, God!	my dead father

most unrighteous tears	all tears:—why she, even she— O, God! a beast, that wants discourse of reason, Would have mourn’d longer—married with my uncle, My father’s brother, but no more like my father Than I to Hercules: within a month: Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears Had left the flushing in her galled eyes, She married. O, most wicked speed, to post With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!	dishonest tears

her galled eyes	all tears:—why she, even she— O, God! a beast, that wants discourse of reason, Would have mourn’d longer—married with my uncle, My father’s brother, but no more like my father Than I to Hercules: within a month: Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears Had left the flushing in her galled eyes, She married. O, most wicked speed, to post With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!	Her irritated eyes.

My father’s brother	all tears:—why she, even she— O, God! a beast, that wants discourse of reason, Would have mourn’d longer—married with my uncle, My father’s brother, but no more like my father Than I to Hercules: within a month: Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears Had left the flushing in her galled eyes, She married. O, most wicked speed, to post With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!	My uncle

uncle, My father’s brother, but no more like my father Than I to Hercules: within a month: Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears Had left the flushing in her galled eyes, She married.	all tears:—why she, even she— O, God! a beast, that wants discourse of reason, Would have mourn’d longer—married with my uncle, My father’s brother, but no more like my father Than I to Hercules: within a month: Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears Had left the flushing in her galled eyes, She married. O, most wicked speed, to post With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!	My uncle, my father's brother, is nothing like my father, any more than I'm like Hercules. Within a month—before she'd even finished crying over my father's death, before the redness had even faded from her swollen, irritated eyes—she married him.

incestuous sheets	a beast, that wants discourse of reason, Would have mourn’d longer—married with my uncle, My father’s brother, but no more like my father Than I to Hercules: within a month: Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears Had left the flushing in her galled eyes, She married. O, most wicked speed, to post With such dexterity to incestuous sheets! It is not nor it cannot come to good:	A marriage bed considered incestuous.

post With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!	a beast, that wants discourse of reason, Would have mourn’d longer—married with my uncle, My father’s brother, but no more like my father Than I to Hercules: within a month: Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears Had left the flushing in her galled eyes, She married. O, most wicked speed, to post With such dexterity to incestuous sheets! It is not nor it cannot come to good:	rush so quickly into a marriage that's practically incestuous!

such dexterity	a beast, that wants discourse of reason, Would have mourn’d longer—married with my uncle, My father’s brother, but no more like my father Than I to Hercules: within a month: Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears Had left the flushing in her galled eyes, She married. O, most wicked speed, to post With such dexterity to incestuous sheets! It is not nor it cannot come to good:	such speed

Hail to your lordship!	Hail to your lordship!	Hail to your lordship!

your poor servant	The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.	Your humble servant.

same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.	The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.	The same, my lord, and your humble servant always.

make you from Wittenberg, Horatio? Marcellus?	Sir, my good friend; I’ll change that name with you: And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio? Marcellus?	What are you doing here from Wittenberg, Horatio? And Marcellus?

make you from Wittenberg?	Good even, sir. But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?	What are you doing away from Wittenberg?

A truant disposition	A truant disposition, good my lord.	A tendency to skip out.

truster of your own report Against yourself: I know you are no truant.	I would not hear your enemy say so, Nor shall you do mine ear that violence, To make it truster of your own report Against yourself: I know you are no truant. But what is your affair in Elsinore?	believing your own accusations against yourself. I know you're not skipping school.

affair in Elsinore?	I would not hear your enemy say so, Nor shall you do mine ear that violence, To make it truster of your own report Against yourself: I know you are no truant. But what is your affair in Elsinore? We’ll teach you to drink	Business in Elsinore?

your father’s funeral	My lord, I came to see your father’s funeral.	your father's funeral

came to see your father’s funeral.	My lord, I came to see your father’s funeral.	Came to see your father's funeral.

my mother’s wedding	I pray thee, do not mock me, fellow-student; I think it was to see my mother’s wedding.	My mother's wedding.

lord, it follow’d hard upon.	Indeed, my lord, it follow’d hard upon.	my lord, it happened very soon after.

thrift, Horatio!	Thrift, thrift, Horatio! the funeral baked meats Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.	It was thrifty, Horatio!

Thrift, thrift	Thrift, thrift, Horatio! the funeral baked meats Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.	Save money, save money.

the funeral baked meats	Thrift, thrift, Horatio! the funeral baked meats Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables. Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!	The leftover food from the funeral

met my dearest foe in heaven Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!	the funeral baked meats Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables. Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio! My father!—methinks I see my father.	I wish I'd met my worst enemy in heaven before I ever saw that day, Horatio!

my dearest foe	the funeral baked meats Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables. Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio! My father!—methinks I see my father.	my worst enemy

eye, Horatio.	In my mind’s eye, Horatio.	eye, Horatio.

my mind’s eye	In my mind’s eye, Horatio.	My imagination.

a goodly king	I saw him once; he was a goodly king.	a good king

take him for all in all, I shall not look upon his like again.	He was a man, take him for all in all, I shall not look upon his like again.	Considering everything, I'll never see someone like him again.

an attent ear	Season your admiration for a while With an attent ear, till I may deliver, Upon the witness of these gentlemen, This marvel to you.	attentive ear

witness of these gentlemen, This marvel to you.	Season your admiration for a while With an attent ear, till I may deliver, Upon the witness of these gentlemen, This marvel to you.	These gentlemen can confirm this amazing thing I'm about to tell you.

God’s love	For God’s love, let me hear.	God's love

middle of the night, Been thus encounter’d.	Two nights together had these gentlemen, Marcellus and Bernardo, on their watch, In the dead vast and middle of the night, Been thus encounter’d. A figure like your father, Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe, Appears before them, and with solemn march Goes slow and stately by them: thrice he walk’d By their oppress’d and fear-surprised eyes, Within his truncheon’s length; whilst they, distill’d Almost to jelly with the act of fear, Stand dumb and speak not to him.	met something like this.

he walk’d By their oppress’d and fear-surprised eyes, Within his truncheon’s length; whilst they, distill’d Almost to jelly with the act of fear, Stand dumb and speak not to him.	Two nights together had these gentlemen, Marcellus and Bernardo, on their watch, In the dead vast and middle of the night, Been thus encounter’d. A figure like your father, Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe, Appears before them, and with solemn march Goes slow and stately by them: thrice he walk’d By their oppress’d and fear-surprised eyes, Within his truncheon’s length; whilst they, distill’d Almost to jelly with the act of fear, Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me In dreadful secrecy impart they did; And I with them the third night kept the watch: Where, as they had deliver’d, both in time, Form of the thing, each word made true and good, The apparition comes: I knew your father; These hands are not more like.	He walked within the distance of his staff from their overwhelmed and frightened eyes, while they, almost paralyzed with fear, stood speechless and didn't speak to him.

his truncheon’s length	Two nights together had these gentlemen, Marcellus and Bernardo, on their watch, In the dead vast and middle of the night, Been thus encounter’d. A figure like your father, Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe, Appears before them, and with solemn march Goes slow and stately by them: thrice he walk’d By their oppress’d and fear-surprised eyes, Within his truncheon’s length; whilst they, distill’d Almost to jelly with the act of fear, Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me In dreadful secrecy impart they did; And I with them the third night kept the watch: Where, as they had deliver’d, both in time, Form of the thing, each word made true and good, The apparition comes: I knew your father; These hands are not more like.	The distance of his staff.

dreadful secrecy	A figure like your father, Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe, Appears before them, and with solemn march Goes slow and stately by them: thrice he walk’d By their oppress’d and fear-surprised eyes, Within his truncheon’s length; whilst they, distill’d Almost to jelly with the act of fear, Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me In dreadful secrecy impart they did; And I with them the third night kept the watch: Where, as they had deliver’d, both in time, Form of the thing, each word made true and good, The apparition comes: I knew your father; These hands are not more like.	terrible secret

I with them the third night kept the watch: Where, as they had deliver’d, both in time, Form of the thing, each word made true and good, The apparition comes: I knew your father; These hands are not more like.	A figure like your father, Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe, Appears before them, and with solemn march Goes slow and stately by them: thrice he walk’d By their oppress’d and fear-surprised eyes, Within his truncheon’s length; whilst they, distill’d Almost to jelly with the act of fear, Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me In dreadful secrecy impart they did; And I with them the third night kept the watch: Where, as they had deliver’d, both in time, Form of the thing, each word made true and good, The apparition comes: I knew your father; These hands are not more like.	I kept watch with them the third night, and just as they said, at the right time, the ghost appeared exactly as they described. I knew it was your father; I'm as sure of it as I am of my own hands.

lord, upon the platform where we watch’d.	My lord, upon the platform where we watch’d.	My lord, on the platform where we were watching.

vanish’d from our sight.	My lord, I did; But answer made it none: yet once methought It lifted up its head and did address Itself to motion, like as it would speak; But even then the morning cock crew loud, And at the sound it shrunk in haste away, And vanish’d from our sight.	disappeared from our sight.

Arm’d, my lord.	Arm’d, my lord.	Ready for battle, my lord.

look’d he	What, look’d he frowningly?	Did he look?

countenance more in sorrow than in anger.	A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.	A face showing more sadness than anger.

fix’d his eyes upon you?	And fix’d his eyes upon you?	Stared at you?

moderate haste	While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.	medium speed

one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.	While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.	Someone in a hurry could count to a hundred.

A sable silver’d	It was, as I have seen it in his life, A sable silver’d.	A dark cloud with a silver lining.

was, as I have seen it in his life, A sable silver’d.	It was, as I have seen it in his life, A sable silver’d.	was, as I saw in his life, a dark cloud with a silver lining.

watch to-night; Perchance ’twill walk again.	I will watch to-night; Perchance ’twill walk again.	Watch tonight; maybe it will walk again.

speak to it, though hell itself should gape And bid me hold my peace.	If it assume my noble father’s person, I’ll speak to it, though hell itself should gape And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all, If you have hitherto conceal’d this sight, Let it be tenable in your silence still; And whatsoever else shall hap to-night, Give it an understanding, but no tongue: I will requite your loves.	I'll talk to it, even if hell opens up and tells me to be quiet.

my noble father’s person	If it assume my noble father’s person, I’ll speak to it, though hell itself should gape And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all, If you have hitherto conceal’d this sight, Let it be tenable in your silence still; And whatsoever else shall hap to-night, Give it an understanding, but no tongue: I will requite your loves.	My noble father himself

hitherto conceal’d this sight, Let it be tenable in your silence still; And whatsoever else shall hap to-night, Give it an understanding, but no tongue: I will requite your loves.	If it assume my noble father’s person, I’ll speak to it, though hell itself should gape And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all, If you have hitherto conceal’d this sight, Let it be tenable in your silence still; And whatsoever else shall hap to-night, Give it an understanding, but no tongue: I will requite your loves. So, fare you well: Upon the platform, ’twixt eleven and twelve, I’ll visit you.	If you've kept this a secret so far, keep it secret still. And whatever else happens tonight, understand it, but don't talk about it. I will repay your loyalty.

duty to your honour.	Our duty to your honour.	Duty to your honor.

loves, as mine to you: farewell.	Your loves, as mine to you: farewell. (Exeunt all but Hamlet.)	My love to you is the same as yours to me: goodbye.

all but Hamlet.)	Your loves, as mine to you: farewell. (Exeunt all but Hamlet.) My father’s spirit in arms!	except Hamlet.)

My father’s spirit	(Exeunt all but Hamlet.) My father’s spirit in arms! all is not well; I doubt some foul play: would the night were come!	My father's ghost.

foul deeds	all is not well; I doubt some foul play: would the night were come! Till then sit still, my soul: foul deeds will rise, Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s eyes. (Exit.)	evil acts

men’s eyes	all is not well; I doubt some foul play: would the night were come! Till then sit still, my soul: foul deeds will rise, Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s eyes. (Exit.)	people's eyes

rise, Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s eyes.	all is not well; I doubt some foul play: would the night were come! Till then sit still, my soul: foul deeds will rise, Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s eyes. (Exit.)	will come to light, even if you try to bury them.

give benefit And convoy is assistant, do not sleep, But let me hear from you.	My necessaries are embark’d: farewell: And, sister, as the winds give benefit And convoy is assistant, do not sleep, But let me hear from you.	as the winds are favorable and a ship is available, don't delay, but write to me.

perfume and suppliance of a minute; No more.	For Hamlet and the trifling of his favour, Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood, A violet in the youth of primy nature, Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting, The perfume and suppliance of a minute; No more.	a fleeting fragrance, gone in a moment; nothing more.

primy nature	For Hamlet and the trifling of his favour, Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood, A violet in the youth of primy nature, Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting, The perfume and suppliance of a minute; No more.	youthful prime

wide withal	Think it no more: For nature, crescent, does not grow alone In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes, The inward service of the mind and soul Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now, And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch The virtue of his will: but you must fear, His greatness weigh’d, his will is not his own; For he himself is subject to his birth: He may not, as unvalued persons do, Carve for himself; for on his choice depends The safety and health of this whole state; And therefore must his choice be circumscribed Unto the voice and yielding of that body Whereof he is the head.	also expands.

The inward service	Think it no more: For nature, crescent, does not grow alone In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes, The inward service of the mind and soul Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now, And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch The virtue of his will: but you must fear, His greatness weigh’d, his will is not his own; For he himself is subject to his birth: He may not, as unvalued persons do, Carve for himself; for on his choice depends The safety and health of this whole state; And therefore must his choice be circumscribed Unto the voice and yielding of that body Whereof he is the head.	The work done by his mind and soul

service of the mind and soul Grows wide withal.	Think it no more: For nature, crescent, does not grow alone In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes, The inward service of the mind and soul Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now, And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch The virtue of his will: but you must fear, His greatness weigh’d, his will is not his own; For he himself is subject to his birth: He may not, as unvalued persons do, Carve for himself; for on his choice depends The safety and health of this whole state; And therefore must his choice be circumscribed Unto the voice and yielding of that body Whereof he is the head.	His mind and soul also develop.

do, Carve for himself; for on his choice depends The safety and health of this whole state; And therefore must his choice be circumscribed Unto the voice and yielding of that body Whereof he is the head.	Think it no more: For nature, crescent, does not grow alone In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes, The inward service of the mind and soul Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now, And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch The virtue of his will: but you must fear, His greatness weigh’d, his will is not his own; For he himself is subject to his birth: He may not, as unvalued persons do, Carve for himself; for on his choice depends The safety and health of this whole state; And therefore must his choice be circumscribed Unto the voice and yielding of that body Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you, It fits your wisdom so far to believe it As he in his particular act and place May give his saying deed; which is no further Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.	choose for himself, because the well-being of the entire country depends on his decisions. Therefore, his choice must be limited to what the nation as a whole wants and allows, since he is their leader.

unvalued persons	Think it no more: For nature, crescent, does not grow alone In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes, The inward service of the mind and soul Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now, And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch The virtue of his will: but you must fear, His greatness weigh’d, his will is not his own; For he himself is subject to his birth: He may not, as unvalued persons do, Carve for himself; for on his choice depends The safety and health of this whole state; And therefore must his choice be circumscribed Unto the voice and yielding of that body Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you, It fits your wisdom so far to believe it As he in his particular act and place May give his saying deed; which is no further Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.	ordinary people

his saying deed	Perhaps he loves you now, And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch The virtue of his will: but you must fear, His greatness weigh’d, his will is not his own; For he himself is subject to his birth: He may not, as unvalued persons do, Carve for himself; for on his choice depends The safety and health of this whole state; And therefore must his choice be circumscribed Unto the voice and yielding of that body Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you, It fits your wisdom so far to believe it As he in his particular act and place May give his saying deed; which is no further Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal. Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain, If with too credent ear you list his songs, Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open To his unmaster’d importunity.	Turning his words into action.

he in his particular act and place May give his saying deed; which is no further Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.	Perhaps he loves you now, And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch The virtue of his will: but you must fear, His greatness weigh’d, his will is not his own; For he himself is subject to his birth: He may not, as unvalued persons do, Carve for himself; for on his choice depends The safety and health of this whole state; And therefore must his choice be circumscribed Unto the voice and yielding of that body Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you, It fits your wisdom so far to believe it As he in his particular act and place May give his saying deed; which is no further Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal. Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain, If with too credent ear you list his songs, Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open To his unmaster’d importunity.	he can only act on his love as much as Denmark allows.

your chaste treasure	Then if he says he loves you, It fits your wisdom so far to believe it As he in his particular act and place May give his saying deed; which is no further Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal. Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain, If with too credent ear you list his songs, Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open To his unmaster’d importunity. Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister, And keep you in the rear of your affection, Out of the shot and danger of desire.	Your virginity.

open To his unmaster’d importunity.	Then if he says he loves you, It fits your wisdom so far to believe it As he in his particular act and place May give his saying deed; which is no further Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal. Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain, If with too credent ear you list his songs, Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open To his unmaster’d importunity. Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister, And keep you in the rear of your affection, Out of the shot and danger of desire.	give in to his uncontrolled begging.

his unmaster’d importunity	Then if he says he loves you, It fits your wisdom so far to believe it As he in his particular act and place May give his saying deed; which is no further Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal. Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain, If with too credent ear you list his songs, Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open To his unmaster’d importunity. Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister, And keep you in the rear of your affection, Out of the shot and danger of desire.	his uncontrolled begging

too credent ear	Then if he says he loves you, It fits your wisdom so far to believe it As he in his particular act and place May give his saying deed; which is no further Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal. Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain, If with too credent ear you list his songs, Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open To his unmaster’d importunity. Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister, And keep you in the rear of your affection, Out of the shot and danger of desire.	believing too easily

the morn and liquid dew	Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister, And keep you in the rear of your affection, Out of the shot and danger of desire. The chariest maid is prodigal enough, If she unmask her beauty to the moon: Virtue itself ’scapes not calumnious strokes: The canker galls the infants of the spring, Too oft before their buttons be disclosed, And in the morn and liquid dew of youth Contagious blastments are most imminent. Be wary then; best safety lies in fear: Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.	Morning and fresh dew.

The chariest maid	Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister, And keep you in the rear of your affection, Out of the shot and danger of desire. The chariest maid is prodigal enough, If she unmask her beauty to the moon: Virtue itself ’scapes not calumnious strokes: The canker galls the infants of the spring, Too oft before their buttons be disclosed, And in the morn and liquid dew of youth Contagious blastments are most imminent. Be wary then; best safety lies in fear: Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.	The most virtuous girl

galls the infants of the spring, Too oft before their buttons be disclosed, And in the morn and liquid dew of youth Contagious blastments are most imminent.	Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister, And keep you in the rear of your affection, Out of the shot and danger of desire. The chariest maid is prodigal enough, If she unmask her beauty to the moon: Virtue itself ’scapes not calumnious strokes: The canker galls the infants of the spring, Too oft before their buttons be disclosed, And in the morn and liquid dew of youth Contagious blastments are most imminent. Be wary then; best safety lies in fear: Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.	destroys the young buds of spring, too often before they even open, and in the morning dew of youth, dangerous infections are most likely to spread.

youth Contagious blastments	Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister, And keep you in the rear of your affection, Out of the shot and danger of desire. The chariest maid is prodigal enough, If she unmask her beauty to the moon: Virtue itself ’scapes not calumnious strokes: The canker galls the infants of the spring, Too oft before their buttons be disclosed, And in the morn and liquid dew of youth Contagious blastments are most imminent. Be wary then; best safety lies in fear: Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.	youth is easily infected

watchman to my heart.	I shall the effect of this good lesson keep, As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother, Do not, as some ungracious pastors do, Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven; Whiles, like a puff’d and reckless libertine, Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads, And recks not his own rede.	guarding my heart.

the steep and thorny way	I shall the effect of this good lesson keep, As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother, Do not, as some ungracious pastors do, Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven; Whiles, like a puff’d and reckless libertine, Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads, And recks not his own rede.	the difficult and painful path

a puff’d and reckless libertine	I shall the effect of this good lesson keep, As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother, Do not, as some ungracious pastors do, Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven; Whiles, like a puff’d and reckless libertine, Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads, And recks not his own rede.	A conceited and careless person who lives freely.

the primrose path	I shall the effect of this good lesson keep, As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother, Do not, as some ungracious pastors do, Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven; Whiles, like a puff’d and reckless libertine, Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads, And recks not his own rede.	the easy path of pleasure

his own rede	I shall the effect of this good lesson keep, As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother, Do not, as some ungracious pastors do, Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven; Whiles, like a puff’d and reckless libertine, Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads, And recks not his own rede.	his own advice

some ungracious pastors	I shall the effect of this good lesson keep, As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother, Do not, as some ungracious pastors do, Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven; Whiles, like a puff’d and reckless libertine, Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads, And recks not his own rede.	some unkind ministers

Whiles, like a puff’d and reckless libertine, Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads, And recks not his own rede.	I shall the effect of this good lesson keep, As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother, Do not, as some ungracious pastors do, Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven; Whiles, like a puff’d and reckless libertine, Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads, And recks not his own rede.	While he, like a conceited and careless playboy, walks the easy, pleasure-filled path and doesn't heed his own advice.

dalliance treads	I shall the effect of this good lesson keep, As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother, Do not, as some ungracious pastors do, Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven; Whiles, like a puff’d and reckless libertine, Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads, And recks not his own rede.	walks the easy path of pleasure

A double blessing	I stay too long: but here my father comes. (A double blessing is a double grace; Occasion smiles upon a second leave.)	is a double grace

Laertes! aboard, aboard, for shame!	Yet here, Laertes! aboard, aboard, for shame! The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail, And you are stay’d for.	Laertes! Get on board, get on board, you should be ashamed!

Yet here, Laertes	Yet here, Laertes! aboard, aboard, for shame! The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail, And you are stay’d for.	Yet you're still here, Laertes.

stay’d for.	Yet here, Laertes! aboard, aboard, for shame! The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail, And you are stay’d for. There; my blessing with thee!	waited for.

blessing with thee!	The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail, And you are stay’d for. There; my blessing with thee! And these few precepts in thy memory See thou character.	May my blessing be with you!

precepts in thy memory See thou character.	There; my blessing with thee! And these few precepts in thy memory See thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue, Nor any unproportion’d thought his act.	Remember these rules I'm giving you.

these few precepts	There; my blessing with thee! And these few precepts in thy memory See thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue, Nor any unproportion’d thought his act.	these few rules

Grapple them to thy soul with hoops of steel; But do not dull thy palm with entertainment Of each new-hatch’d, unfledged comrade.	Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar. Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried, Grapple them to thy soul with hoops of steel; But do not dull thy palm with entertainment Of each new-hatch’d, unfledged comrade. Beware Of entrance to a quarrel, but being in, Bear’t that the opposed may beware of thee.	Hold onto your true friends tightly; don't waste your time on every new and untested acquaintance.

each new-hatch’d, unfledged comrade	Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar. Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried, Grapple them to thy soul with hoops of steel; But do not dull thy palm with entertainment Of each new-hatch’d, unfledged comrade. Beware Of entrance to a quarrel, but being in, Bear’t that the opposed may beware of thee.	every new, inexperienced friend

Beware Of entrance to a quarrel, but being in, Bear’t that the opposed may beware of thee.	Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried, Grapple them to thy soul with hoops of steel; But do not dull thy palm with entertainment Of each new-hatch’d, unfledged comrade. Beware Of entrance to a quarrel, but being in, Bear’t that the opposed may beware of thee. Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice; Take each man’s censure, but reserve thy judgment.	Avoid getting into fights, but if you do, make sure your opponent regrets it.

each man’s censure	Beware Of entrance to a quarrel, but being in, Bear’t that the opposed may beware of thee. Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice; Take each man’s censure, but reserve thy judgment. Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy, But not express’d in fancy; rich, not gaudy; For the apparel oft proclaims the man, And they in France of the best rank and station Are of a most select and generous chief in that.	Listen to what everyone says about you.

Costly thy habit	Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice; Take each man’s censure, but reserve thy judgment. Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy, But not express’d in fancy; rich, not gaudy; For the apparel oft proclaims the man, And they in France of the best rank and station Are of a most select and generous chief in that. Neither a borrower nor a lender be; For loan oft loses both itself and friend, And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.	Dress as well as you can afford.

But not express’d	Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice; Take each man’s censure, but reserve thy judgment. Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy, But not express’d in fancy; rich, not gaudy; For the apparel oft proclaims the man, And they in France of the best rank and station Are of a most select and generous chief in that. Neither a borrower nor a lender be; For loan oft loses both itself and friend, And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.	But not showy.

a most select and generous chief	Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice; Take each man’s censure, but reserve thy judgment. Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy, But not express’d in fancy; rich, not gaudy; For the apparel oft proclaims the man, And they in France of the best rank and station Are of a most select and generous chief in that. Neither a borrower nor a lender be; For loan oft loses both itself and friend, And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.	They are very refined and generous in that.

they in France of the best rank and station Are of a most select and generous chief in that.	Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice; Take each man’s censure, but reserve thy judgment. Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy, But not express’d in fancy; rich, not gaudy; For the apparel oft proclaims the man, And they in France of the best rank and station Are of a most select and generous chief in that. Neither a borrower nor a lender be; For loan oft loses both itself and friend, And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.	In France, the best-dressed people are known for their refined and generous taste.

loses both itself and friend, And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.	Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy, But not express’d in fancy; rich, not gaudy; For the apparel oft proclaims the man, And they in France of the best rank and station Are of a most select and generous chief in that. Neither a borrower nor a lender be; For loan oft loses both itself and friend, And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry. This above all: to thine ownself be true, And it must follow, as the night the day, Thou canst not then be false to any man.	you lose both the money and the friend. And borrowing makes you less careful with your money.

Neither a borrower	Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy, But not express’d in fancy; rich, not gaudy; For the apparel oft proclaims the man, And they in France of the best rank and station Are of a most select and generous chief in that. Neither a borrower nor a lender be; For loan oft loses both itself and friend, And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry. This above all: to thine ownself be true, And it must follow, as the night the day, Thou canst not then be false to any man.	Don't borrow or lend.

thine ownself be true, And it must follow, as the night the day, Thou canst not then be false to any man.	Neither a borrower nor a lender be; For loan oft loses both itself and friend, And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry. This above all: to thine ownself be true, And it must follow, as the night the day, Thou canst not then be false to any man. Farewell: my blessing season this in thee!	Be true to yourself, and it will certainly follow, as day follows night, that you cannot be false to anyone else.

Farewell, Ophelia; and remember well What I have said to you.	Farewell, Ophelia; and remember well What I have said to you.	Goodbye, Ophelia; and remember carefully what I told you.

Tis in my memory lock’d, And you yourself shall keep the key of it.	’Tis in my memory lock’d, And you yourself shall keep the key of it.	It's locked in my memory, and you're the only one who will ever have access to it.

my memory lock’d	’Tis in my memory lock’d, And you yourself shall keep the key of it.	locked in my memory

the Lord Hamlet	So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet.	Lord Hamlet

something touching the Lord Hamlet.	So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet.	something about Lord Hamlet.

Have of your audience been most free and bounteous:	Marry, well bethought: ’Tis told me, he hath very oft of late Given private time to you; and you yourself Have of your audience been most free and bounteous: If it be so, as so ’tis put on me, And that in way of caution, I must tell you, You do not understand yourself so clearly As it behoves my daughter and your honour.	You've been very generous with your time and attention.

tell you, You do not understand yourself so clearly As it behoves my daughter and your honour.	Marry, well bethought: ’Tis told me, he hath very oft of late Given private time to you; and you yourself Have of your audience been most free and bounteous: If it be so, as so ’tis put on me, And that in way of caution, I must tell you, You do not understand yourself so clearly As it behoves my daughter and your honour. What is between you?	I'm telling you, you don't realize the danger of this as it concerns my daughter and your reputation.

tenders Of his affection to me.	He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders Of his affection to me.	Offers of his love to me.

speak like a green girl, Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.	pooh! you speak like a green girl, Unsifted in such perilous circumstance. Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?	You're speaking like a naive girl, inexperienced in such a dangerous situation.

such perilous circumstance	pooh! you speak like a green girl, Unsifted in such perilous circumstance. Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?	Dangerous situation.

teach you: think yourself a baby; That you have ta’en these tenders for true pay, Which are not sterling.	Marry, I’ll teach you: think yourself a baby; That you have ta’en these tenders for true pay, Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly; Or—not to crack the wind of the poor phrase, Running it thus—you’ll tender me a fool.	I'll explain it to you: consider yourself naive, like a baby, for accepting these offers as genuine payment, when they're actually worthless.

importuned me with love In honourable fashion.	My lord, he hath importuned me with love In honourable fashion.	He has courted me with respectful love.

honourable fashion	My lord, he hath importuned me with love In honourable fashion.	Respectful way.

vows of heaven.	And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord, With almost all the holy vows of heaven.	solemn oaths.

almost all the holy vows	And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord, With almost all the holy vows of heaven.	almost all the most sacred promises

extinct in both, Even in their promise, as it is a-making, You must not take for fire.	Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know, When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul Lends the tongue vows: these blazes, daughter, Giving more light than heat, extinct in both, Even in their promise, as it is a-making, You must not take for fire. From this time Be somewhat scanter of your maiden presence; Set your entreatments at a higher rate Than a command to parley.	They disappear completely, even as they're being made. Don't mistake them for genuine passion.

rate Than a command to parley.	I do know, When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul Lends the tongue vows: these blazes, daughter, Giving more light than heat, extinct in both, Even in their promise, as it is a-making, You must not take for fire. From this time Be somewhat scanter of your maiden presence; Set your entreatments at a higher rate Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet, Believe so much in him, that he is young, And with a larger tether may he walk Than may be given you: in few, Ophelia, Do not believe his vows; for they are brokers, Not of that dye which their investments show, But mere implorators of unholy suits, Breathing like sanctified and pious bonds, The better to beguile.	Value your company more highly than just a brief conversation.

Breathing like sanctified and pious bonds, The better to beguile.	From this time Be somewhat scanter of your maiden presence; Set your entreatments at a higher rate Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet, Believe so much in him, that he is young, And with a larger tether may he walk Than may be given you: in few, Ophelia, Do not believe his vows; for they are brokers, Not of that dye which their investments show, But mere implorators of unholy suits, Breathing like sanctified and pious bonds, The better to beguile. This is for all: I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth, Have you so slander any moment leisure, As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.	They seem holy and devoted, but only to deceive you.

sanctified and pious bonds	From this time Be somewhat scanter of your maiden presence; Set your entreatments at a higher rate Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet, Believe so much in him, that he is young, And with a larger tether may he walk Than may be given you: in few, Ophelia, Do not believe his vows; for they are brokers, Not of that dye which their investments show, But mere implorators of unholy suits, Breathing like sanctified and pious bonds, The better to beguile. This is for all: I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth, Have you so slander any moment leisure, As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.	holy and sacred promises

a larger tether	From this time Be somewhat scanter of your maiden presence; Set your entreatments at a higher rate Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet, Believe so much in him, that he is young, And with a larger tether may he walk Than may be given you: in few, Ophelia, Do not believe his vows; for they are brokers, Not of that dye which their investments show, But mere implorators of unholy suits, Breathing like sanctified and pious bonds, The better to beguile. This is for all: I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth, Have you so slander any moment leisure, As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.	more freedom

, Ophelia	From this time Be somewhat scanter of your maiden presence; Set your entreatments at a higher rate Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet, Believe so much in him, that he is young, And with a larger tether may he walk Than may be given you: in few, Ophelia, Do not believe his vows; for they are brokers, Not of that dye which their investments show, But mere implorators of unholy suits, Breathing like sanctified and pious bonds, The better to beguile. This is for all: I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth, Have you so slander any moment leisure, As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.	Ophelia

unholy suits	From this time Be somewhat scanter of your maiden presence; Set your entreatments at a higher rate Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet, Believe so much in him, that he is young, And with a larger tether may he walk Than may be given you: in few, Ophelia, Do not believe his vows; for they are brokers, Not of that dye which their investments show, But mere implorators of unholy suits, Breathing like sanctified and pious bonds, The better to beguile. This is for all: I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth, Have you so slander any moment leisure, As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.	immoral requests

is for all: I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth, Have you so slander any moment leisure, As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.	For Lord Hamlet, Believe so much in him, that he is young, And with a larger tether may he walk Than may be given you: in few, Ophelia, Do not believe his vows; for they are brokers, Not of that dye which their investments show, But mere implorators of unholy suits, Breathing like sanctified and pious bonds, The better to beguile. This is for all: I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth, Have you so slander any moment leisure, As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet. Look to’t, I charge you: come your ways.	And finally, I want to be clear: from now on, don't waste any of your free time talking to Hamlet.

the Lord Hamlet	For Lord Hamlet, Believe so much in him, that he is young, And with a larger tether may he walk Than may be given you: in few, Ophelia, Do not believe his vows; for they are brokers, Not of that dye which their investments show, But mere implorators of unholy suits, Breathing like sanctified and pious bonds, The better to beguile. This is for all: I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth, Have you so slander any moment leisure, As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet. Look to’t, I charge you: come your ways.	Lord Hamlet

an eager air	It is a nipping and an eager air.	fresh air

season Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.	Indeed? I heard it not: then it draws near the season Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk. (A flourish of trumpets, and ordnance shot off, within.)	the time of year when the ghost usually appears.

flourish of trumpets, and ordnance shot off, within.)	I heard it not: then it draws near the season Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk. (A flourish of trumpets, and ordnance shot off, within.) What does this mean, my lord?	(Trumpets play loudly, and cannons are fired, coming from inside the castle.)

(A flourish	I heard it not: then it draws near the season Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk. (A flourish of trumpets, and ordnance shot off, within.) What does this mean, my lord?	of trumpets, and ordnance shot off, within.)

The kettle-drum	The king doth wake to-night and takes his rouse, Keeps wassail, and the swaggering up-spring reels; And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down, The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out The triumph of his pledge.	The kettle-drum

wake to-night and takes his rouse, Keeps wassail, and the swaggering up-spring reels; And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down, The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out The triumph of his pledge.	The king doth wake to-night and takes his rouse, Keeps wassail, and the swaggering up-spring reels; And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down, The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out The triumph of his pledge.	wakes up tonight for a party, celebrates with drinking, and dances wildly. As he finishes his drinks of Rhine wine, the kettle-drum and trumpet loudly announce his toast.

the swaggering up-spring reels	The king doth wake to-night and takes his rouse, Keeps wassail, and the swaggering up-spring reels; And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down, The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out The triumph of his pledge.	A lively, boisterous dance is performed.

manner born, it is a custom More honour’d in the breach than the observance.	Ay, marry, is’t: But to my mind, though I am native here And to the manner born, it is a custom More honour’d in the breach than the observance. This heavy-headed revel east and west Makes us traduced and tax’d of other nations: They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase Soil our addition; and indeed it takes From our achievements, though perform’d at height, The pith and marrow of our attribute.	born into this custom, it's one that's better to ignore than to follow.

a custom More honour’d	Ay, marry, is’t: But to my mind, though I am native here And to the manner born, it is a custom More honour’d in the breach than the observance. This heavy-headed revel east and west Makes us traduced and tax’d of other nations: They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase Soil our addition; and indeed it takes From our achievements, though perform’d at height, The pith and marrow of our attribute.	a tradition better to break than to keep.

swinish phrase Soil	Ay, marry, is’t: But to my mind, though I am native here And to the manner born, it is a custom More honour’d in the breach than the observance. This heavy-headed revel east and west Makes us traduced and tax’d of other nations: They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase Soil our addition; and indeed it takes From our achievements, though perform’d at height, The pith and marrow of our attribute. So, oft it chances in particular men, That for some vicious mole of nature in them, As, in their birth—wherein they are not guilty, Since nature cannot choose his origin— By the o’ergrowth of some complexion, Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason, Or by some habit that too much o’er-leavens The form of plausive manners, that these men, Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect, Being nature’s livery, or fortune’s star— Their virtues else—be they as pure as grace, As infinite as man may undergo— Shall in the general censure take corruption From that particular fault: the dram of eale Doth all the noble substance of a doubt To his own scandal.	disgusting language stains

takes From our achievements, though perform’d at height, The pith and marrow of our attribute.	Ay, marry, is’t: But to my mind, though I am native here And to the manner born, it is a custom More honour’d in the breach than the observance. This heavy-headed revel east and west Makes us traduced and tax’d of other nations: They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase Soil our addition; and indeed it takes From our achievements, though perform’d at height, The pith and marrow of our attribute. So, oft it chances in particular men, That for some vicious mole of nature in them, As, in their birth—wherein they are not guilty, Since nature cannot choose his origin— By the o’ergrowth of some complexion, Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason, Or by some habit that too much o’er-leavens The form of plausive manners, that these men, Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect, Being nature’s livery, or fortune’s star— Their virtues else—be they as pure as grace, As infinite as man may undergo— Shall in the general censure take corruption From that particular fault: the dram of eale Doth all the noble substance of a doubt To his own scandal.	It diminishes our accomplishments, even when they are at their best, and damages our reputation.

us drunkards	Ay, marry, is’t: But to my mind, though I am native here And to the manner born, it is a custom More honour’d in the breach than the observance. This heavy-headed revel east and west Makes us traduced and tax’d of other nations: They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase Soil our addition; and indeed it takes From our achievements, though perform’d at height, The pith and marrow of our attribute. So, oft it chances in particular men, That for some vicious mole of nature in them, As, in their birth—wherein they are not guilty, Since nature cannot choose his origin— By the o’ergrowth of some complexion, Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason, Or by some habit that too much o’er-leavens The form of plausive manners, that these men, Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect, Being nature’s livery, or fortune’s star— Their virtues else—be they as pure as grace, As infinite as man may undergo— Shall in the general censure take corruption From that particular fault: the dram of eale Doth all the noble substance of a doubt To his own scandal.	They call us drunkards.

plausive manners	This heavy-headed revel east and west Makes us traduced and tax’d of other nations: They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase Soil our addition; and indeed it takes From our achievements, though perform’d at height, The pith and marrow of our attribute. So, oft it chances in particular men, That for some vicious mole of nature in them, As, in their birth—wherein they are not guilty, Since nature cannot choose his origin— By the o’ergrowth of some complexion, Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason, Or by some habit that too much o’er-leavens The form of plausive manners, that these men, Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect, Being nature’s livery, or fortune’s star— Their virtues else—be they as pure as grace, As infinite as man may undergo— Shall in the general censure take corruption From that particular fault: the dram of eale Doth all the noble substance of a doubt To his own scandal.	Pleasing behavior.

his own scandal	This heavy-headed revel east and west Makes us traduced and tax’d of other nations: They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase Soil our addition; and indeed it takes From our achievements, though perform’d at height, The pith and marrow of our attribute. So, oft it chances in particular men, That for some vicious mole of nature in them, As, in their birth—wherein they are not guilty, Since nature cannot choose his origin— By the o’ergrowth of some complexion, Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason, Or by some habit that too much o’er-leavens The form of plausive manners, that these men, Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect, Being nature’s livery, or fortune’s star— Their virtues else—be they as pure as grace, As infinite as man may undergo— Shall in the general censure take corruption From that particular fault: the dram of eale Doth all the noble substance of a doubt To his own scandal.	Ruins his reputation.

nature’s livery	This heavy-headed revel east and west Makes us traduced and tax’d of other nations: They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase Soil our addition; and indeed it takes From our achievements, though perform’d at height, The pith and marrow of our attribute. So, oft it chances in particular men, That for some vicious mole of nature in them, As, in their birth—wherein they are not guilty, Since nature cannot choose his origin— By the o’ergrowth of some complexion, Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason, Or by some habit that too much o’er-leavens The form of plausive manners, that these men, Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect, Being nature’s livery, or fortune’s star— Their virtues else—be they as pure as grace, As infinite as man may undergo— Shall in the general censure take corruption From that particular fault: the dram of eale Doth all the noble substance of a doubt To his own scandal.	Nature's mark.

one defect	This heavy-headed revel east and west Makes us traduced and tax’d of other nations: They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase Soil our addition; and indeed it takes From our achievements, though perform’d at height, The pith and marrow of our attribute. So, oft it chances in particular men, That for some vicious mole of nature in them, As, in their birth—wherein they are not guilty, Since nature cannot choose his origin— By the o’ergrowth of some complexion, Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason, Or by some habit that too much o’er-leavens The form of plausive manners, that these men, Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect, Being nature’s livery, or fortune’s star— Their virtues else—be they as pure as grace, As infinite as man may undergo— Shall in the general censure take corruption From that particular fault: the dram of eale Doth all the noble substance of a doubt To his own scandal.	A single flaw.

the general censure	This heavy-headed revel east and west Makes us traduced and tax’d of other nations: They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase Soil our addition; and indeed it takes From our achievements, though perform’d at height, The pith and marrow of our attribute. So, oft it chances in particular men, That for some vicious mole of nature in them, As, in their birth—wherein they are not guilty, Since nature cannot choose his origin— By the o’ergrowth of some complexion, Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason, Or by some habit that too much o’er-leavens The form of plausive manners, that these men, Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect, Being nature’s livery, or fortune’s star— Their virtues else—be they as pure as grace, As infinite as man may undergo— Shall in the general censure take corruption From that particular fault: the dram of eale Doth all the noble substance of a doubt To his own scandal.	Public opinion.

some vicious mole	This heavy-headed revel east and west Makes us traduced and tax’d of other nations: They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase Soil our addition; and indeed it takes From our achievements, though perform’d at height, The pith and marrow of our attribute. So, oft it chances in particular men, That for some vicious mole of nature in them, As, in their birth—wherein they are not guilty, Since nature cannot choose his origin— By the o’ergrowth of some complexion, Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason, Or by some habit that too much o’er-leavens The form of plausive manners, that these men, Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect, Being nature’s livery, or fortune’s star— Their virtues else—be they as pure as grace, As infinite as man may undergo— Shall in the general censure take corruption From that particular fault: the dram of eale Doth all the noble substance of a doubt To his own scandal.	some bad character flaw

pure as grace, As infinite as man may undergo— Shall in the general censure take corruption From that particular fault: the dram of eale Doth all the noble substance of a doubt To his own scandal.	This heavy-headed revel east and west Makes us traduced and tax’d of other nations: They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase Soil our addition; and indeed it takes From our achievements, though perform’d at height, The pith and marrow of our attribute. So, oft it chances in particular men, That for some vicious mole of nature in them, As, in their birth—wherein they are not guilty, Since nature cannot choose his origin— By the o’ergrowth of some complexion, Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason, Or by some habit that too much o’er-leavens The form of plausive manners, that these men, Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect, Being nature’s livery, or fortune’s star— Their virtues else—be they as pure as grace, As infinite as man may undergo— Shall in the general censure take corruption From that particular fault: the dram of eale Doth all the noble substance of a doubt To his own scandal.	as pure as goodness, as much as a person can experience, will be judged harshly because of that one fault. A tiny bit of evil can ruin a great person's reputation.

thee airs	Angels and ministers of grace defend us! Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn’d, Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell, Be thy intents wicked or charitable, Thou comest in such a questionable shape That I will speak to thee: I’ll call thee Hamlet, King, father, royal Dane: O, answer me!	Bring with you breezes from heaven.

airs from heaven or blasts from hell, Be thy intents wicked or charitable,	Angels and ministers of grace defend us! Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn’d, Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell, Be thy intents wicked or charitable, Thou comest in such a questionable shape That I will speak to thee: I’ll call thee Hamlet, King, father, royal Dane: O, answer me!	Whether you bring good or evil influences, whether your intentions are evil or good,

goblin damn’d	Angels and ministers of grace defend us! Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn’d, Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell, Be thy intents wicked or charitable, Thou comest in such a questionable shape That I will speak to thee: I’ll call thee Hamlet, King, father, royal Dane: O, answer me!	damned goblin

such a questionable shape	Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn’d, Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell, Be thy intents wicked or charitable, Thou comest in such a questionable shape That I will speak to thee: I’ll call thee Hamlet, King, father, royal Dane: O, answer me! Let me not burst in ignorance; but tell Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death, Have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre, Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn’d, Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws, To cast thee up again.	such a strange form

comest in such a questionable shape That I will speak to thee: I’ll call thee Hamlet, King, father, royal Dane: O, answer me!	Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn’d, Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell, Be thy intents wicked or charitable, Thou comest in such a questionable shape That I will speak to thee: I’ll call thee Hamlet, King, father, royal Dane: O, answer me! Let me not burst in ignorance; but tell Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death, Have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre, Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn’d, Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws, To cast thee up again.	You appear in such a strange form that I have to speak to you. I'll call you Hamlet, King, father, royal Dane! Oh, answer me!

Why thy canonized bones	Thou comest in such a questionable shape That I will speak to thee: I’ll call thee Hamlet, King, father, royal Dane: O, answer me! Let me not burst in ignorance; but tell Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death, Have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre, Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn’d, Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws, To cast thee up again. What may this mean, That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel Revisit’st thus the glimpses of the moon, Making night hideous; and we fools of nature So horridly to shake our disposition With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?	Why your buried, holy bones

his ponderous and marble jaws	Thou comest in such a questionable shape That I will speak to thee: I’ll call thee Hamlet, King, father, royal Dane: O, answer me! Let me not burst in ignorance; but tell Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death, Have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre, Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn’d, Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws, To cast thee up again. What may this mean, That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel Revisit’st thus the glimpses of the moon, Making night hideous; and we fools of nature So horridly to shake our disposition With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?	Its heavy, marble mouth

oped his ponderous and marble jaws, To cast thee up again.	Thou comest in such a questionable shape That I will speak to thee: I’ll call thee Hamlet, King, father, royal Dane: O, answer me! Let me not burst in ignorance; but tell Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death, Have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre, Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn’d, Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws, To cast thee up again. What may this mean, That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel Revisit’st thus the glimpses of the moon, Making night hideous; and we fools of nature So horridly to shake our disposition With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?	has opened its heavy marble jaws to throw you back out.

complete steel Revisit’st	Let me not burst in ignorance; but tell Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death, Have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre, Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn’d, Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws, To cast thee up again. What may this mean, That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel Revisit’st thus the glimpses of the moon, Making night hideous; and we fools of nature So horridly to shake our disposition With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls? Say, why is this?	full armor appears again

glimpses of the moon, Making night hideous; and we fools of nature So horridly to shake our disposition With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?	Let me not burst in ignorance; but tell Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death, Have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre, Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn’d, Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws, To cast thee up again. What may this mean, That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel Revisit’st thus the glimpses of the moon, Making night hideous; and we fools of nature So horridly to shake our disposition With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls? Say, why is this?	appearing in the moonlight, making the night terrifying; and why do we, mere mortals, so dreadfully disturb our minds with thoughts beyond our understanding?

dead corse	Let me not burst in ignorance; but tell Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death, Have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre, Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn’d, Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws, To cast thee up again. What may this mean, That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel Revisit’st thus the glimpses of the moon, Making night hideous; and we fools of nature So horridly to shake our disposition With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls? Say, why is this?	dead body

beckons you to go away with it, As if it some impartment did desire To you alone.	It beckons you to go away with it, As if it some impartment did desire To you alone.	It's calling you to leave with it, as if it has a secret to share just with you.

a pin’s fee	Why, what should be the fear? I do not set my life in a pin’s fee; And for my soul, what can it do to that, Being a thing immortal as itself? It waves me forth again:	a pin's worth

do to that, Being a thing immortal as itself?	Why, what should be the fear? I do not set my life in a pin’s fee; And for my soul, what can it do to that, Being a thing immortal as itself? It waves me forth again:	do to my soul, since it's immortal like itself (the threat)?

the dreadful summit	What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord, Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff That beetles o’er his base into the sea, And there assume some other horrible form, Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason And draw you into madness? think of it: The very place puts toys of desperation, Without more motive, into every brain That looks so many fathoms to the sea And hears it roar beneath.	the terrifying top

so many fathoms	What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord, Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff That beetles o’er his base into the sea, And there assume some other horrible form, Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason And draw you into madness? think of it: The very place puts toys of desperation, Without more motive, into every brain That looks so many fathoms to the sea And hears it roar beneath.	so deep

more motive	What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord, Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff That beetles o’er his base into the sea, And there assume some other horrible form, Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason And draw you into madness? think of it: The very place puts toys of desperation, Without more motive, into every brain That looks so many fathoms to the sea And hears it roar beneath.	more reason

brain That looks so many fathoms to the sea And hears it roar beneath.	What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord, Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff That beetles o’er his base into the sea, And there assume some other horrible form, Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason And draw you into madness? think of it: The very place puts toys of desperation, Without more motive, into every brain That looks so many fathoms to the sea And hears it roar beneath.	mind that gazes down so many fathoms to the sea and hears it roar below.

hardy as the Nemean lion’s nerve.	My fate cries out, And makes each petty artery in this body As hardy as the Nemean lion’s nerve. Still am I call’d.	brave as the Nemean lion.

the Nemean lion’s nerve	My fate cries out, And makes each petty artery in this body As hardy as the Nemean lion’s nerve. Still am I call’d.	the courage of the Nemean lion

each petty artery	My fate cries out, And makes each petty artery in this body As hardy as the Nemean lion’s nerve. Still am I call’d.	every small vein

(Exeunt Ghost	Go on; I’ll follow thee. (Exeunt Ghost and Hamlet.)	[They exit.]

fit thus to obey him.	Let’s follow; ’tis not fit thus to obey him.	It's not right to obey him like this.

Alas, poor ghost	Alas, poor ghost!	Oh, poor ghost!

lend thy serious hearing To what I shall unfold.	Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing To what I shall unfold.	Listen carefully to what I'm about to tell you.

thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.	So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.	You must take revenge when you hear about it.

Doom’d for a certain term to walk the night, And for the day confined to fast in fires, Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature Are burnt and purged away.	I am thy father’s spirit, Doom’d for a certain term to walk the night, And for the day confined to fast in fires, Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid To tell the secrets of my prison-house, I could a tale unfold whose lightest word Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood, Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres, Thy knotted and combined locks to part And each particular hair to stand on end, Like quills upon the fretful porpentine: But this eternal blazon must not be To ears of flesh and blood.	I am destined to wander at night for a limited time, and during the day I am forced to suffer in flames, until the terrible sins I committed while alive are burned away and cleansed.

thy father’s spirit	I am thy father’s spirit, Doom’d for a certain term to walk the night, And for the day confined to fast in fires, Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid To tell the secrets of my prison-house, I could a tale unfold whose lightest word Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood, Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres, Thy knotted and combined locks to part And each particular hair to stand on end, Like quills upon the fretful porpentine: But this eternal blazon must not be To ears of flesh and blood.	Your father's ghost

this eternal blazon	I am thy father’s spirit, Doom’d for a certain term to walk the night, And for the day confined to fast in fires, Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid To tell the secrets of my prison-house, I could a tale unfold whose lightest word Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood, Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres, Thy knotted and combined locks to part And each particular hair to stand on end, Like quills upon the fretful porpentine: But this eternal blazon must not be To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list!	This revelation of eternity

knotted and combined locks	I am thy father’s spirit, Doom’d for a certain term to walk the night, And for the day confined to fast in fires, Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid To tell the secrets of my prison-house, I could a tale unfold whose lightest word Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood, Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres, Thy knotted and combined locks to part And each particular hair to stand on end, Like quills upon the fretful porpentine: But this eternal blazon must not be To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list!	hair that is tangled and matted together

quills upon the fretful porpentine: But this eternal blazon must not be To ears of flesh and blood.	I am thy father’s spirit, Doom’d for a certain term to walk the night, And for the day confined to fast in fires, Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid To tell the secrets of my prison-house, I could a tale unfold whose lightest word Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood, Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres, Thy knotted and combined locks to part And each particular hair to stand on end, Like quills upon the fretful porpentine: But this eternal blazon must not be To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list!	like quills on an irritated porcupine. But I'm not allowed to reveal this eternal truth to mortal ears.

the fretful porpentine	I am thy father’s spirit, Doom’d for a certain term to walk the night, And for the day confined to fast in fires, Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid To tell the secrets of my prison-house, I could a tale unfold whose lightest word Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood, Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres, Thy knotted and combined locks to part And each particular hair to stand on end, Like quills upon the fretful porpentine: But this eternal blazon must not be To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list!	an agitated porcupine

his foul and most unnatural murder	Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.	The foul and unnatural murder of him.

is; But this most foul, strange and unnatural.	Murder most foul, as in the best it is; But this most foul, strange and unnatural.	But this murder is especially horrible, strange, and against nature.

sweep to my revenge.	Haste me to know’t, that I, with wings as swift As meditation or the thoughts of love, May sweep to my revenge.	rush to get my revenge.

be than the fat weed That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf, Wouldst thou not stir in this.	I find thee apt; And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf, Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear: ’Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard, A serpent stung me; so the whole ear of Denmark Is by a forged process of my death Rankly abused: but know, thou noble youth, The serpent that did sting thy father’s life Now wears his crown.	You'd have to be dumber than a lazy weed growing by the river of forgetfulness not to react to this.

Lethe wharf	I find thee apt; And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf, Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear: ’Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard, A serpent stung me; so the whole ear of Denmark Is by a forged process of my death Rankly abused: but know, thou noble youth, The serpent that did sting thy father’s life Now wears his crown.	bank of the river Lethe

thy father’s life	I find thee apt; And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf, Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear: ’Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard, A serpent stung me; so the whole ear of Denmark Is by a forged process of my death Rankly abused: but know, thou noble youth, The serpent that did sting thy father’s life Now wears his crown.	your father's life

my death Rankly	I find thee apt; And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf, Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear: ’Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard, A serpent stung me; so the whole ear of Denmark Is by a forged process of my death Rankly abused: but know, thou noble youth, The serpent that did sting thy father’s life Now wears his crown.	My death is widely misrepresented.

process of my death Rankly abused: but know, thou noble youth, The serpent that did sting thy father’s life Now wears his crown.	I find thee apt; And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf, Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear: ’Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard, A serpent stung me; so the whole ear of Denmark Is by a forged process of my death Rankly abused: but know, thou noble youth, The serpent that did sting thy father’s life Now wears his crown.	is a lie that has poisoned all of Denmark. But know this, my noble son: the snake that took your father's life now wears his crown.

O my prophetic soul	O my prophetic soul! My uncle!	Oh, my gut feeling was right!

O Hamlet	Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast, With witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts— O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power So to seduce!—won to his shameful lust The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen: O Hamlet, what a falling-off was there! From me, whose love was of that dignity That it went hand in hand even with the vow I made to her in marriage, and to decline Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor To those of mine!	O Hamlet!

my most seeming-virtuous queen	Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast, With witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts— O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power So to seduce!—won to his shameful lust The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen: O Hamlet, what a falling-off was there! From me, whose love was of that dignity That it went hand in hand even with the vow I made to her in marriage, and to decline Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor To those of mine!	my queen, who appeared to be the most virtuous

seduce!—won to his shameful lust The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen: O Hamlet, what a falling-off was there!	Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast, With witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts— O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power So to seduce!—won to his shameful lust The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen: O Hamlet, what a falling-off was there! From me, whose love was of that dignity That it went hand in hand even with the vow I made to her in marriage, and to decline Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor To those of mine!	seduced! He won my seemingly virtuous queen over to his disgusting desires. Oh, Hamlet, what a terrible decline that was!

his shameful lust	Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast, With witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts— O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power So to seduce!—won to his shameful lust The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen: O Hamlet, what a falling-off was there! From me, whose love was of that dignity That it went hand in hand even with the vow I made to her in marriage, and to decline Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor To those of mine!	His disgusting desire

traitorous gifts	Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast, With witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts— O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power So to seduce!—won to his shameful lust The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen: O Hamlet, what a falling-off was there! From me, whose love was of that dignity That it went hand in hand even with the vow I made to her in marriage, and to decline Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor To those of mine!	treacherous presents

decline Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor To those of mine!	Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast, With witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts— O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power So to seduce!—won to his shameful lust The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen: O Hamlet, what a falling-off was there! From me, whose love was of that dignity That it went hand in hand even with the vow I made to her in marriage, and to decline Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor To those of mine! But virtue, as it never will be moved, Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven, So lust, though to a radiant angel link’d, Will sate itself in a celestial bed, And prey on garbage.	to fall for a pathetic guy who's nowhere near as good as me!

a radiant angel	From me, whose love was of that dignity That it went hand in hand even with the vow I made to her in marriage, and to decline Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor To those of mine! But virtue, as it never will be moved, Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven, So lust, though to a radiant angel link’d, Will sate itself in a celestial bed, And prey on garbage. But, soft!	A beautiful angel.

a celestial bed	From me, whose love was of that dignity That it went hand in hand even with the vow I made to her in marriage, and to decline Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor To those of mine! But virtue, as it never will be moved, Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven, So lust, though to a radiant angel link’d, Will sate itself in a celestial bed, And prey on garbage. But, soft!	a heavenly marriage

moved, Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven, So lust, though to a radiant angel link’d, Will sate itself in a celestial bed, And prey on garbage.	From me, whose love was of that dignity That it went hand in hand even with the vow I made to her in marriage, and to decline Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor To those of mine! But virtue, as it never will be moved, Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven, So lust, though to a radiant angel link’d, Will sate itself in a celestial bed, And prey on garbage. But, soft!	Virtue won't be swayed, even if tempted by sin disguised as something beautiful. Similarly, lust, even if paired with a perfect angel, will eventually tire of perfection and seek something disgusting.

eager droppings	methinks I scent the morning air; Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard, My custom always of the afternoon, Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole, With juice of cursed hebenon in a vial, And in the porches of my ears did pour The leperous distilment; whose effect Holds such an enmity with blood of man That swift as quicksilver it courses through The natural gates and alleys of the body, And with a sudden vigour doth posset And curd, like eager droppings into milk, The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine; And a most instant tetter bark’d about, Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust, All my smooth body. Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother’s hand Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch’d: Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin, Unhousel’d, disappointed, unaneled, No reckoning made, but sent to my account With all my imperfections on my head: O, horrible!	Acidic drops

such an enmity	methinks I scent the morning air; Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard, My custom always of the afternoon, Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole, With juice of cursed hebenon in a vial, And in the porches of my ears did pour The leperous distilment; whose effect Holds such an enmity with blood of man That swift as quicksilver it courses through The natural gates and alleys of the body, And with a sudden vigour doth posset And curd, like eager droppings into milk, The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine; And a most instant tetter bark’d about, Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust, All my smooth body. Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother’s hand Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch’d: Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin, Unhousel’d, disappointed, unaneled, No reckoning made, but sent to my account With all my imperfections on my head: O, horrible!	such a conflict

porches of my ears did pour The leperous distilment; whose effect Holds such an enmity with blood of man That swift as quicksilver it courses through The natural gates and alleys of the body, And with a sudden vigour doth posset And curd, like eager droppings into milk, The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine; And a most instant tetter bark’d about, Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust, All my smooth body.	methinks I scent the morning air; Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard, My custom always of the afternoon, Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole, With juice of cursed hebenon in a vial, And in the porches of my ears did pour The leperous distilment; whose effect Holds such an enmity with blood of man That swift as quicksilver it courses through The natural gates and alleys of the body, And with a sudden vigour doth posset And curd, like eager droppings into milk, The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine; And a most instant tetter bark’d about, Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust, All my smooth body. Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother’s hand Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch’d: Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin, Unhousel’d, disappointed, unaneled, No reckoning made, but sent to my account With all my imperfections on my head: O, horrible!	poured the poisonous liquid into my ears; its effect is so harmful to human blood that it races through the body's veins like quicksilver, quickly curdling and clotting the healthy blood, like acid in milk. It did that to me. Immediately, a repulsive rash, like a leper's, covered my entire body with a disgusting crust.

a most instant tetter	methinks I scent the morning air; Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard, My custom always of the afternoon, Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole, With juice of cursed hebenon in a vial, And in the porches of my ears did pour The leperous distilment; whose effect Holds such an enmity with blood of man That swift as quicksilver it courses through The natural gates and alleys of the body, And with a sudden vigour doth posset And curd, like eager droppings into milk, The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine; And a most instant tetter bark’d about, Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust, All my smooth body. Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother’s hand Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch’d: Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin, Unhousel’d, disappointed, unaneled, No reckoning made, but sent to my account With all my imperfections on my head: O, horrible!	A sudden skin eruption

a sudden vigour	methinks I scent the morning air; Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard, My custom always of the afternoon, Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole, With juice of cursed hebenon in a vial, And in the porches of my ears did pour The leperous distilment; whose effect Holds such an enmity with blood of man That swift as quicksilver it courses through The natural gates and alleys of the body, And with a sudden vigour doth posset And curd, like eager droppings into milk, The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine; And a most instant tetter bark’d about, Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust, All my smooth body. Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother’s hand Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch’d: Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin, Unhousel’d, disappointed, unaneled, No reckoning made, but sent to my account With all my imperfections on my head: O, horrible!	a sudden force

cursed hebenon	methinks I scent the morning air; Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard, My custom always of the afternoon, Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole, With juice of cursed hebenon in a vial, And in the porches of my ears did pour The leperous distilment; whose effect Holds such an enmity with blood of man That swift as quicksilver it courses through The natural gates and alleys of the body, And with a sudden vigour doth posset And curd, like eager droppings into milk, The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine; And a most instant tetter bark’d about, Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust, All my smooth body. Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother’s hand Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch’d: Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin, Unhousel’d, disappointed, unaneled, No reckoning made, but sent to my account With all my imperfections on my head: O, horrible!	poisonous substance

The leperous distilment	methinks I scent the morning air; Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard, My custom always of the afternoon, Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole, With juice of cursed hebenon in a vial, And in the porches of my ears did pour The leperous distilment; whose effect Holds such an enmity with blood of man That swift as quicksilver it courses through The natural gates and alleys of the body, And with a sudden vigour doth posset And curd, like eager droppings into milk, The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine; And a most instant tetter bark’d about, Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust, All my smooth body. Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother’s hand Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch’d: Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin, Unhousel’d, disappointed, unaneled, No reckoning made, but sent to my account With all my imperfections on my head: O, horrible!	The poisonous liquid

The thin and wholesome blood	methinks I scent the morning air; Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard, My custom always of the afternoon, Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole, With juice of cursed hebenon in a vial, And in the porches of my ears did pour The leperous distilment; whose effect Holds such an enmity with blood of man That swift as quicksilver it courses through The natural gates and alleys of the body, And with a sudden vigour doth posset And curd, like eager droppings into milk, The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine; And a most instant tetter bark’d about, Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust, All my smooth body. Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother’s hand Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch’d: Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin, Unhousel’d, disappointed, unaneled, No reckoning made, but sent to my account With all my imperfections on my head: O, horrible!	My healthy blood.

vile and loathsome crust	methinks I scent the morning air; Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard, My custom always of the afternoon, Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole, With juice of cursed hebenon in a vial, And in the porches of my ears did pour The leperous distilment; whose effect Holds such an enmity with blood of man That swift as quicksilver it courses through The natural gates and alleys of the body, And with a sudden vigour doth posset And curd, like eager droppings into milk, The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine; And a most instant tetter bark’d about, Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust, All my smooth body. Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother’s hand Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch’d: Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin, Unhousel’d, disappointed, unaneled, No reckoning made, but sent to my account With all my imperfections on my head: O, horrible!	disgusting and repulsive scabs

a brother’s hand	Sleeping within my orchard, My custom always of the afternoon, Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole, With juice of cursed hebenon in a vial, And in the porches of my ears did pour The leperous distilment; whose effect Holds such an enmity with blood of man That swift as quicksilver it courses through The natural gates and alleys of the body, And with a sudden vigour doth posset And curd, like eager droppings into milk, The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine; And a most instant tetter bark’d about, Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust, All my smooth body. Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother’s hand Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch’d: Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin, Unhousel’d, disappointed, unaneled, No reckoning made, but sent to my account With all my imperfections on my head: O, horrible! O, horrible!	A brother's doing.

sent to my account With all my imperfections on my head: O, horrible!	Sleeping within my orchard, My custom always of the afternoon, Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole, With juice of cursed hebenon in a vial, And in the porches of my ears did pour The leperous distilment; whose effect Holds such an enmity with blood of man That swift as quicksilver it courses through The natural gates and alleys of the body, And with a sudden vigour doth posset And curd, like eager droppings into milk, The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine; And a most instant tetter bark’d about, Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust, All my smooth body. Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother’s hand Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch’d: Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin, Unhousel’d, disappointed, unaneled, No reckoning made, but sent to my account With all my imperfections on my head: O, horrible! O, horrible!	Sent to face judgment with all my sins unforgiven. Oh, how awful!

all my imperfections	Sleeping within my orchard, My custom always of the afternoon, Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole, With juice of cursed hebenon in a vial, And in the porches of my ears did pour The leperous distilment; whose effect Holds such an enmity with blood of man That swift as quicksilver it courses through The natural gates and alleys of the body, And with a sudden vigour doth posset And curd, like eager droppings into milk, The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine; And a most instant tetter bark’d about, Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust, All my smooth body. Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother’s hand Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch’d: Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin, Unhousel’d, disappointed, unaneled, No reckoning made, but sent to my account With all my imperfections on my head: O, horrible! O, horrible!	all my sins

bed of Denmark be A couch for luxury and damned incest.	most horrible! If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not; Let not the royal bed of Denmark be A couch for luxury and damned incest. But, howsoever thou pursuest this act, Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive Against thy mother aught: leave her to heaven And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge, To prick and sting her.	Denmark's royal bed must not become a place for lust and disgusting incest.

leave her to heaven And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge, To prick and sting her.	If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not; Let not the royal bed of Denmark be A couch for luxury and damned incest. But, howsoever thou pursuest this act, Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive Against thy mother aught: leave her to heaven And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge, To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once!	Leave her to God and to the guilt that pricks and stings her heart.

her bosom lodge	If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not; Let not the royal bed of Denmark be A couch for luxury and damned incest. But, howsoever thou pursuest this act, Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive Against thy mother aught: leave her to heaven And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge, To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once!	lodge in her heart

gins to pale his uneffectual fire:	Fare thee well at once! The glow-worm shows the matin to be near, And ’gins to pale his uneffectual fire: Adieu, adieu!	starts to dim its weak light.

his uneffectual fire	Fare thee well at once! The glow-worm shows the matin to be near, And ’gins to pale his uneffectual fire: Adieu, adieu!	his weak light

O, fie! Hold	And shall I couple hell? O, fie! Hold, hold, my heart; And you, my sinews, grow not instant old, But bear me stiffly up.	Oh, no! Stop!

you, my sinews, grow not instant old, But bear me stiffly up.	O, fie! Hold, hold, my heart; And you, my sinews, grow not instant old, But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee!	Don't fail me now, my muscles! Don't get weak! Hold me up strong.

holds a seat In this distracted globe.	Remember thee! Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat In this distracted globe. Remember thee!	Remains in my confused mind.

this distracted globe	Remember thee! Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat In this distracted globe. Remember thee!	This confused head.

forms, all pressures past, That youth and observation copied there; And thy commandment all alone shall live Within the book and volume of my brain, Unmix’d with baser matter: yes, by heaven!	Remember thee! Yea, from the table of my memory I’ll wipe away all trivial fond records, All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past, That youth and observation copied there; And thy commandment all alone shall live Within the book and volume of my brain, Unmix’d with baser matter: yes, by heaven! O most pernicious woman!	Everything I learned when I was young, everything I experienced, will be erased from my memory. Your command alone will live in my mind, pure and unadulterated. Yes, I swear it!

all trivial fond records	Remember thee! Yea, from the table of my memory I’ll wipe away all trivial fond records, All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past, That youth and observation copied there; And thy commandment all alone shall live Within the book and volume of my brain, Unmix’d with baser matter: yes, by heaven! O most pernicious woman!	All silly, loving memories

baser matter	Remember thee! Yea, from the table of my memory I’ll wipe away all trivial fond records, All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past, That youth and observation copied there; And thy commandment all alone shall live Within the book and volume of my brain, Unmix’d with baser matter: yes, by heaven! O most pernicious woman!	Less important things.

O most pernicious woman	Yea, from the table of my memory I’ll wipe away all trivial fond records, All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past, That youth and observation copied there; And thy commandment all alone shall live Within the book and volume of my brain, Unmix’d with baser matter: yes, by heaven! O most pernicious woman! O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!	Oh, most evil woman!

O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain	O most pernicious woman! O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain! My tables—meet it is I set it down, That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain; At least I’m sure it may be so in Denmark: (Writing.)	Oh, villain, villain, that smiling, damned villain!

I’m sure it may be so in Denmark: (Writing.)	O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain! My tables—meet it is I set it down, That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain; At least I’m sure it may be so in Denmark: (Writing.) So, uncle, there you are.	I'm sure that's how things can be in Denmark. (Writing.)

Adieu, adieu!	So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word; It is “Adieu, adieu! remember me.”	Goodbye, goodbye!

Hillo, ho, ho, my lord!	(Within.) Hillo, ho, ho, my lord!	Hello, hello, hello, my lord!

Hillo, ho, ho, boy! come, bird, come.	Hillo, ho, ho, boy! come, bird, come.	Hey there, boy! Come on, bird, come on.

is’t, my noble lord?	How is’t, my noble lord?	How is it going, my noble lord?

How is’t	How is’t, my noble lord?	How are you?

dwelling in all Denmark	There’s ne’er a villain dwelling in all Denmark But he’s an arrant knave.	lives anywhere in Denmark

a villain dwelling	There’s ne’er a villain dwelling in all Denmark But he’s an arrant knave.	a villain living

an arrant knave	There’s ne’er a villain dwelling in all Denmark But he’s an arrant knave.	a complete scoundrel

hold it fit that we shake hands and part: You, as your business and desire shall point you; For every man has business and desire, Such as it is; and for mine own poor part, Look you, I’ll go pray.	Why, right; you are i’ the right; And so, without more circumstance at all, I hold it fit that we shake hands and part: You, as your business and desire shall point you; For every man has business and desire, Such as it is; and for mine own poor part, Look you, I’ll go pray.	I think it's best we shake hands and leave now. You go wherever your work and wishes take you, because everyone has their own things to do and wants. As for me, I'm going to pray.

more circumstance	Why, right; you are i’ the right; And so, without more circumstance at all, I hold it fit that we shake hands and part: You, as your business and desire shall point you; For every man has business and desire, Such as it is; and for mine own poor part, Look you, I’ll go pray.	more delay

wild and whirling words	These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.	crazy and confusing words

offence, my lord.	There’s no offence, my lord.	No offence, my lord.

much offence	Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio, And much offence too. Touching this vision here, It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you: For your desire to know what is between us, O’ermaster’t as you may.	much wrong

is an honest ghost, that let me tell you: For your desire to know what is between us, O’ermaster’t as you may.	Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio, And much offence too. Touching this vision here, It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you: For your desire to know what is between us, O’ermaster’t as you may. And now, good friends, As you are friends, scholars and soldiers, Give me one poor request.	it's a truthful ghost, I can tell you that. As for your desire to know what's going on between us, just try to control it as best you can.

lord, not I.	In faith, My lord, not I.	My lord, not I.

hear this fellow in the cellarage— Consent to swear.	art thou there, truepenny? Come on—you hear this fellow in the cellarage— Consent to swear.	Can you hear the guy in the cellar? Agree to swear (on something).

oath, my lord.	Propose the oath, my lord.	Oath, my lord.

Swear by my sword.	Never to speak of this that you have seen, Swear by my sword.	Promise on my sword.

Hic et ubique	Hic et ubique? then we’ll shift our ground.	Here and everywhere?

lay your hands again upon my sword: Never to speak of this that you have heard, Swear by my sword.	then we’ll shift our ground. Come hither, gentlemen, And lay your hands again upon my sword: Never to speak of this that you have heard, Swear by my sword.	Put your hands on my sword again: Swear by my sword never to speak of what you've heard.

A worthy pioner	Well said, old mole! canst work i’ the earth so fast? A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.	A good digger!

things in heaven and earth, Horatio, Than are dreamt of in your philosophy.	And therefore as a stranger give it welcome. There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come; Here, as before, never, so help you mercy, How strange or odd soe’er	Horatio, there are more things in heaven and earth than you can imagine.

help you mercy, How strange or odd soe’er	There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come; Here, as before, never, so help you mercy, How strange or odd soe’er I bear myself, As I perchance hereafter shall think meet To put an antic disposition on, That you, at such times seeing me, never shall, With arms encumber’d thus, or this headshake, Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase, As “Well, well, we know,” or “We could, an if we would,” Or “If we list to speak,” or “There be, an if they might,” Or such ambiguous giving out, to note That you know aught of me: this not to do, So grace and mercy at your most need help you, Swear.	so help you God, no matter how strange or weird

an antic disposition	But come; Here, as before, never, so help you mercy, How strange or odd soe’er I bear myself, As I perchance hereafter shall think meet To put an antic disposition on, That you, at such times seeing me, never shall, With arms encumber’d thus, or this headshake, Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase, As “Well, well, we know,” or “We could, an if we would,” Or “If we list to speak,” or “There be, an if they might,” Or such ambiguous giving out, to note That you know aught of me: this not to do, So grace and mercy at your most need help you, Swear.	a strange act

some doubtful phrase	But come; Here, as before, never, so help you mercy, How strange or odd soe’er I bear myself, As I perchance hereafter shall think meet To put an antic disposition on, That you, at such times seeing me, never shall, With arms encumber’d thus, or this headshake, Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase, As “Well, well, we know,” or “We could, an if we would,” Or “If we list to speak,” or “There be, an if they might,” Or such ambiguous giving out, to note That you know aught of me: this not to do, So grace and mercy at your most need help you, Swear.	some vague or questionable remark

help you, Swear.	But come; Here, as before, never, so help you mercy, How strange or odd soe’er I bear myself, As I perchance hereafter shall think meet To put an antic disposition on, That you, at such times seeing me, never shall, With arms encumber’d thus, or this headshake, Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase, As “Well, well, we know,” or “We could, an if we would,” Or “If we list to speak,” or “There be, an if they might,” Or such ambiguous giving out, to note That you know aught of me: this not to do, So grace and mercy at your most need help you, Swear.	Swear you will help me keep my secret.

, perturbed spirit	Rest, rest, perturbed spirit! (They swear.)	Troubled spirit

friending to you, God willing, shall not lack.	(They swear.) So, gentlemen, With all my love I do commend me to you: And what so poor a man as Hamlet is May do, to express his love and friending to you, God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together; And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.	I will do everything I can to be a friend to you, God willing.

fingers on your lips, I pray.	So, gentlemen, With all my love I do commend me to you: And what so poor a man as Hamlet is May do, to express his love and friending to you, God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together; And still your fingers on your lips, I pray. The time is out of joint: O cursed spite, That ever I was born to set it right!	Please, keep your fingers on your lips.

out of joint: O cursed spite, That ever I was born to set it right!	Let us go in together; And still your fingers on your lips, I pray. The time is out of joint: O cursed spite, That ever I was born to set it right! Nay, come, let’s go together.	Things are messed up. What a curse that I was born to fix it!

O cursed spite	Let us go in together; And still your fingers on your lips, I pray. The time is out of joint: O cursed spite, That ever I was born to set it right! Nay, come, let’s go together.	Oh, bad luck.

visit him, to make inquire Of his behavior.	You shall do marvellous wisely, good Reynaldo, Before you visit him, to make inquire Of his behavior.	visit him, ask about his behavior.

Take you, as ’twere, some distant knowledge of him;	Marry, well said; very well said. Look you, sir, Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris; And how, and who, what means, and where they keep, What company, at what expense; and finding By this encompassment and drift of question That they do know my son, come you more nearer Than your particular demands will touch it: Take you, as ’twere, some distant knowledge of him; As thus, “I know his father and his friends, And in part him:” do you mark this, Reynaldo?	Pretend you have some slight acquaintance with him;

mark this, Reynaldo?	Look you, sir, Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris; And how, and who, what means, and where they keep, What company, at what expense; and finding By this encompassment and drift of question That they do know my son, come you more nearer Than your particular demands will touch it: Take you, as ’twere, some distant knowledge of him; As thus, “I know his father and his friends, And in part him:” do you mark this, Reynaldo?	Remember this, Reynaldo?

slips As are companions noted and most known To youth and liberty.	“And in part him; but” you may say “not well: But, if’t be he I mean, he’s very wild; Addicted so-and-so:” and there put on him What forgeries you please; marry, none so rank As may dishonour him; take heed of that; But, sir, such wanton, wild and usual slips As are companions noted and most known To youth and liberty.	Mistakes that are commonly seen in young, free people.

a fiery mind	’Faith, no; as you may season it in the charge. You must not put another scandal on him, That he is open to incontinency; That’s not my meaning: but breathe his faults so quaintly That they may seem the taints of liberty, The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind, A savageness in unreclaimed blood, Of general assault.	a passionate spirit

unreclaimed blood	’Faith, no; as you may season it in the charge. You must not put another scandal on him, That he is open to incontinency; That’s not my meaning: but breathe his faults so quaintly That they may seem the taints of liberty, The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind, A savageness in unreclaimed blood, Of general assault.	Untamed passion

savageness in unreclaimed blood, Of general assault.	’Faith, no; as you may season it in the charge. You must not put another scandal on him, That he is open to incontinency; That’s not my meaning: but breathe his faults so quaintly That they may seem the taints of liberty, The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind, A savageness in unreclaimed blood, Of general assault.	Untamed passion, a wildness that everyone experiences.

fetch of wit: You laying these slight sullies on my son, As ’twere a thing a little	Marry, sir, here’s my drift; And, I believe, it is a fetch of wit: You laying these slight sullies on my son, As ’twere a thing a little soil’d i’ the working, Mark you, Your party in converse, him you would sound, Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured He closes with you in this consequence; “Good sir,” or so, or “friend,” or “gentleman,” According to the phrase or the addition Of man and country.	a clever idea: you're putting these small stains on my son, like he's something slightly

these slight sullies	Marry, sir, here’s my drift; And, I believe, it is a fetch of wit: You laying these slight sullies on my son, As ’twere a thing a little soil’d i’ the working, Mark you, Your party in converse, him you would sound, Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured He closes with you in this consequence; “Good sir,” or so, or “friend,” or “gentleman,” According to the phrase or the addition Of man and country.	these small flaws

According to the phrase or the addition Of man and country.	And, I believe, it is a fetch of wit: You laying these slight sullies on my son, As ’twere a thing a little soil’d i’ the working, Mark you, Your party in converse, him you would sound, Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured He closes with you in this consequence; “Good sir,” or so, or “friend,” or “gentleman,” According to the phrase or the addition Of man and country.	Depending on the person's manners and where they are from.

soil’d i	And, I believe, it is a fetch of wit: You laying these slight sullies on my son, As ’twere a thing a little soil’d i’ the working, Mark you, Your party in converse, him you would sound, Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured He closes with you in this consequence; “Good sir,” or so, or “friend,” or “gentleman,” According to the phrase or the addition Of man and country.	a little dirty

the prenominate crimes	And, I believe, it is a fetch of wit: You laying these slight sullies on my son, As ’twere a thing a little soil’d i’ the working, Mark you, Your party in converse, him you would sound, Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured He closes with you in this consequence; “Good sir,” or so, or “friend,” or “gentleman,” According to the phrase or the addition Of man and country.	the crimes already mentioned

something: where did I leave?	And then, sir, does he this—he does—what was I about to say? By the mass, I was about to say something: where did I leave?	Something...where was I?

o’ertook in’s rouse; There falling out at tennis:” or perchance, “I saw him enter such a house of sale	At “closes in the consequence,” ay, marry; He closes thus: “I know the gentleman; I saw him yesterday, or t’ other day, Or then, or then; with such, or such; and, as you say, There was a’ gaming; there o’ertook in’s rouse; There falling out at tennis:” or perchance, “I saw him enter such a house of sale ,” Videlicet, a brothel, or so forth.	was drunk; there was a fight during tennis;" or maybe, "I saw him go into that kind of business"

Videlicet, a brothel, or so forth.	At “closes in the consequence,” ay, marry; He closes thus: “I know the gentleman; I saw him yesterday, or t’ other day, Or then, or then; with such, or such; and, as you say, There was a’ gaming; there o’ertook in’s rouse; There falling out at tennis:” or perchance, “I saw him enter such a house of sale ,” Videlicet, a brothel, or so forth. See you now; Your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth: And thus do we of wisdom and of reach, With windlasses and with assays of bias, By indirections find directions out: So by my former lecture and advice, Shall you my son.	Specifically, a brothel, or something like that.

,” Videlicet	At “closes in the consequence,” ay, marry; He closes thus: “I know the gentleman; I saw him yesterday, or t’ other day, Or then, or then; with such, or such; and, as you say, There was a’ gaming; there o’ertook in’s rouse; There falling out at tennis:” or perchance, “I saw him enter such a house of sale ,” Videlicet, a brothel, or so forth. See you now; Your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth: And thus do we of wisdom and of reach, With windlasses and with assays of bias, By indirections find directions out: So by my former lecture and advice, Shall you my son.	Namely.

Observe his inclination in yourself.	Observe his inclination in yourself.	Observe his inclination in yourself.

(Exit Reynaldo	Farewell! (Exit Reynaldo.)	(Reynaldo exits.)

How now, Ophelia	How now, Ophelia! what’s the matter?	What's wrong, Ophelia?

foul’d, Ungarter’d, and down-gyved to his ankle; Pale as his shirt; his knees knocking each other; And with a look so piteous in purport As if he had been loosed out of hell To speak of horrors—he comes before me.	My lord, as I was sewing in my closet, Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced; No hat upon his head; his stockings foul’d, Ungarter’d, and down-gyved to his ankle; Pale as his shirt; his knees knocking each other; And with a look so piteous in purport As if he had been loosed out of hell To speak of horrors—he comes before me.	Dirty, ungartered, and hanging down around his ankles; as pale as his shirt; his knees knocking together; and with such a look of pitiful meaning, as if he'd been released from hell to tell of horrors—he came before me.

took me by the wrist and held me hard; Then goes he to the length of all his arm; And, with his other hand thus o’er his brow, He falls to such perusal of my face As he would draw it.	He took me by the wrist and held me hard; Then goes he to the length of all his arm; And, with his other hand thus o’er his brow, He falls to such perusal of my face As he would draw it. Long stay’d he so; At last, a little shaking of mine arm And thrice his head thus waving up and down, He raised a sigh so piteous and profound As it did seem to shatter all his bulk And end his being: that done, he lets me go: And, with his head over his shoulder turn’d, He seem’d to find his way without his eyes; For out o’ doors he went without their helps, And, to the last, bended their light on me.	He grabbed my wrist and held it tightly; then he stretched his arm out fully and, with his other hand over his brow, stared intently at my face as if he were trying to draw it.

such perusal	He took me by the wrist and held me hard; Then goes he to the length of all his arm; And, with his other hand thus o’er his brow, He falls to such perusal of my face As he would draw it. Long stay’d he so; At last, a little shaking of mine arm And thrice his head thus waving up and down, He raised a sigh so piteous and profound As it did seem to shatter all his bulk And end his being: that done, he lets me go: And, with his head over his shoulder turn’d, He seem’d to find his way without his eyes; For out o’ doors he went without their helps, And, to the last, bended their light on me.	such a close look

his shoulder turn’d	He took me by the wrist and held me hard; Then goes he to the length of all his arm; And, with his other hand thus o’er his brow, He falls to such perusal of my face As he would draw it. Long stay’d he so; At last, a little shaking of mine arm And thrice his head thus waving up and down, He raised a sigh so piteous and profound As it did seem to shatter all his bulk And end his being: that done, he lets me go: And, with his head over his shoulder turn’d, He seem’d to find his way without his eyes; For out o’ doors he went without their helps, And, to the last, bended their light on me.	his head turned over his shoulder

raised a sigh so piteous and profound As it did seem to shatter all his bulk And end his being: that done, he lets me go: And, with his head over his shoulder turn’d, He seem’d to find his way without his eyes; For out o’ doors he went without their helps, And, to the last, bended their light on me.	He took me by the wrist and held me hard; Then goes he to the length of all his arm; And, with his other hand thus o’er his brow, He falls to such perusal of my face As he would draw it. Long stay’d he so; At last, a little shaking of mine arm And thrice his head thus waving up and down, He raised a sigh so piteous and profound As it did seem to shatter all his bulk And end his being: that done, he lets me go: And, with his head over his shoulder turn’d, He seem’d to find his way without his eyes; For out o’ doors he went without their helps, And, to the last, bended their light on me.	He sighed deeply, as if it would break him apart and kill him. After that, he let me go. Turning his head over his shoulder, he seemed to find his way without looking; he walked out the door without using his eyes, and kept them fixed on me until the very end.

Whose violent property fordoes	Come, go with me: I will go seek the king. This is the very ecstasy of love, Whose violent property fordoes itself And leads the will to desperate undertakings As oft as any passion under heaven That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.	Whose intense nature destroys itself

the very ecstasy	Come, go with me: I will go seek the king. This is the very ecstasy of love, Whose violent property fordoes itself And leads the will to desperate undertakings As oft as any passion under heaven That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.	pure madness

oft as any passion under heaven That does afflict our natures.	Come, go with me: I will go seek the king. This is the very ecstasy of love, Whose violent property fordoes itself And leads the will to desperate undertakings As oft as any passion under heaven That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.	as often as any strong feeling we experience.

did command, I did repel his letters and denied His access to me.	No, my good lord, but, as you did command, I did repel his letters and denied His access to me.	commanded, I rejected his letters and refused to let him see me.

better heed	That hath made him mad. I am sorry that with better heed and judgment I had not quoted him: I fear’d he did but trifle, And meant to wreck thee; but, beshrew my jealousy! By heaven, it is as proper to our age To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions As it is common for the younger sort To lack discretion.	more attention

fear’d he did but trifle, And meant to wreck thee; but, beshrew my jealousy!	That hath made him mad. I am sorry that with better heed and judgment I had not quoted him: I fear’d he did but trifle, And meant to wreck thee; but, beshrew my jealousy! By heaven, it is as proper to our age To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions As it is common for the younger sort To lack discretion.	I feared he was just joking and meant to destroy you, but damn my suspicion!

cast beyond ourselves in our opinions As it is common for the younger sort To lack discretion.	I am sorry that with better heed and judgment I had not quoted him: I fear’d he did but trifle, And meant to wreck thee; but, beshrew my jealousy! By heaven, it is as proper to our age To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions As it is common for the younger sort To lack discretion. Come, go we to the king: This must be known; which, being kept close, might move More grief to hide than hate to utter love.	overestimate our own judgment, as it's typical for young people to be unwise.

More grief	By heaven, it is as proper to our age To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions As it is common for the younger sort To lack discretion. Come, go we to the king: This must be known; which, being kept close, might move More grief to hide than hate to utter love. (Exeunt.)	More sadness

utter love	By heaven, it is as proper to our age To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions As it is common for the younger sort To lack discretion. Come, go we to the king: This must be known; which, being kept close, might move More grief to hide than hate to utter love. (Exeunt.)	express love

hide than hate to utter love.	By heaven, it is as proper to our age To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions As it is common for the younger sort To lack discretion. Come, go we to the king: This must be known; which, being kept close, might move More grief to hide than hate to utter love. (Exeunt.)	cause more pain to conceal than anger to reveal love.

Our hasty sending	Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern! Moreover that we much did long to see you, The need we have to use you did provoke Our hasty sending. Something have you heard Of Hamlet’s transformation; so call it, Sith nor the exterior nor the inward man Resembles that it was.	We sent for you quickly.

we much did long to see you, The need we have to use you did provoke Our hasty sending.	Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern! Moreover that we much did long to see you, The need we have to use you did provoke Our hasty sending. Something have you heard Of Hamlet’s transformation; so call it, Sith nor the exterior nor the inward man Resembles that it was.	We've been wanting to see you for a while, but the reason we sent for you so quickly is because we need your help.

Hamlet’s transformation	Moreover that we much did long to see you, The need we have to use you did provoke Our hasty sending. Something have you heard Of Hamlet’s transformation; so call it, Sith nor the exterior nor the inward man Resembles that it was. What it should be, More than his father’s death, that thus hath put him So much from the understanding of himself, I cannot dream of: I entreat you both, That, being of so young days brought up with him, And sith so neighbour’d to his youth and havior, That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court Some little time: so by your companies To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather, So much as from occasion you may glean, Whether aught, to us unknown, afflicts him thus, That, open’d, lies within our remedy.	Hamlet's change.

the inward man	Moreover that we much did long to see you, The need we have to use you did provoke Our hasty sending. Something have you heard Of Hamlet’s transformation; so call it, Sith nor the exterior nor the inward man Resembles that it was. What it should be, More than his father’s death, that thus hath put him So much from the understanding of himself, I cannot dream of: I entreat you both, That, being of so young days brought up with him, And sith so neighbour’d to his youth and havior, That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court Some little time: so by your companies To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather, So much as from occasion you may glean, Whether aught, to us unknown, afflicts him thus, That, open’d, lies within our remedy.	his inner self

heard Of Hamlet’s transformation; so call it, Sith nor the exterior nor the inward man Resembles that it was.	Moreover that we much did long to see you, The need we have to use you did provoke Our hasty sending. Something have you heard Of Hamlet’s transformation; so call it, Sith nor the exterior nor the inward man Resembles that it was. What it should be, More than his father’s death, that thus hath put him So much from the understanding of himself, I cannot dream of: I entreat you both, That, being of so young days brought up with him, And sith so neighbour’d to his youth and havior, That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court Some little time: so by your companies To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather, So much as from occasion you may glean, Whether aught, to us unknown, afflicts him thus, That, open’d, lies within our remedy.	You've heard about Hamlet's change; that's what we're calling it, since he's not the same person inside or out.

his father’s death	Something have you heard Of Hamlet’s transformation; so call it, Sith nor the exterior nor the inward man Resembles that it was. What it should be, More than his father’s death, that thus hath put him So much from the understanding of himself, I cannot dream of: I entreat you both, That, being of so young days brought up with him, And sith so neighbour’d to his youth and havior, That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court Some little time: so by your companies To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather, So much as from occasion you may glean, Whether aught, to us unknown, afflicts him thus, That, open’d, lies within our remedy.	his father died

sith so neighbour’d	Something have you heard Of Hamlet’s transformation; so call it, Sith nor the exterior nor the inward man Resembles that it was. What it should be, More than his father’s death, that thus hath put him So much from the understanding of himself, I cannot dream of: I entreat you both, That, being of so young days brought up with him, And sith so neighbour’d to his youth and havior, That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court Some little time: so by your companies To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather, So much as from occasion you may glean, Whether aught, to us unknown, afflicts him thus, That, open’d, lies within our remedy.	since you were so close to

, open’d	Something have you heard Of Hamlet’s transformation; so call it, Sith nor the exterior nor the inward man Resembles that it was. What it should be, More than his father’s death, that thus hath put him So much from the understanding of himself, I cannot dream of: I entreat you both, That, being of so young days brought up with him, And sith so neighbour’d to his youth and havior, That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court Some little time: so by your companies To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather, So much as from occasion you may glean, Whether aught, to us unknown, afflicts him thus, That, open’d, lies within our remedy.	, revealed

as from occasion you may glean, Whether aught, to us unknown, afflicts him thus, That, open’d, lies within our remedy.	Something have you heard Of Hamlet’s transformation; so call it, Sith nor the exterior nor the inward man Resembles that it was. What it should be, More than his father’s death, that thus hath put him So much from the understanding of himself, I cannot dream of: I entreat you both, That, being of so young days brought up with him, And sith so neighbour’d to his youth and havior, That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court Some little time: so by your companies To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather, So much as from occasion you may glean, Whether aught, to us unknown, afflicts him thus, That, open’d, lies within our remedy.	as you get the chance, find out if something unknown to us is bothering him, which, if revealed, we can fix.

much talk’d	Good gentlemen, he hath much talk’d of you; And sure I am two men there are not living To whom he more adheres. If it will please you To show us so much gentry and good will As to expend your time with us awhile, For the supply and profit of our hope, Your visitation shall receive such thanks As fits a king’s remembrance.	talked about you a lot

expend your time with us awhile, For the supply and profit of our hope, Your visitation shall receive such thanks As fits a king’s remembrance.	Good gentlemen, he hath much talk’d of you; And sure I am two men there are not living To whom he more adheres. If it will please you To show us so much gentry and good will As to expend your time with us awhile, For the supply and profit of our hope, Your visitation shall receive such thanks As fits a king’s remembrance.	spend some time with us, to help our cause and make our hopes a reality. We will thank you as richly as a king would remember a favor.

a king’s remembrance	Good gentlemen, he hath much talk’d of you; And sure I am two men there are not living To whom he more adheres. If it will please you To show us so much gentry and good will As to expend your time with us awhile, For the supply and profit of our hope, Your visitation shall receive such thanks As fits a king’s remembrance.	A king would remember.

so much gentry	Good gentlemen, he hath much talk’d of you; And sure I am two men there are not living To whom he more adheres. If it will please you To show us so much gentry and good will As to expend your time with us awhile, For the supply and profit of our hope, Your visitation shall receive such thanks As fits a king’s remembrance.	such courtesy

Than to entreaty.	Both your majesties Might, by the sovereign power you have of us, Put your dread pleasures more into command Than to entreaty.	Than to ask as a favor.

Both your majesties	Both your majesties Might, by the sovereign power you have of us, Put your dread pleasures more into command Than to entreaty.	Both your majesties

the sovereign power	Both your majesties Might, by the sovereign power you have of us, Put your dread pleasures more into command Than to entreaty.	the absolute power

we both obey, And here give up ourselves, in the full bent To lay our service freely at your feet, To be commanded.	But we both obey, And here give up ourselves, in the full bent To lay our service freely at your feet, To be commanded.	We both obey and offer ourselves completely to serve you and follow your orders.

gentle Guildenstern	Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.	gentle Guildenstern

My too much changed son	Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz: And I beseech you instantly to visit My too much changed son. Go, some of you, And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.	My son, who has changed so much

gentlemen where Hamlet is.	Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz: And I beseech you instantly to visit My too much changed son. Go, some of you, And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.	gentlemen to where Hamlet is.

(Exeunt Rosencrantz	Ay, amen! (Exeunt Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and some Attendants.)	Rosencrantz exits.

ambassadors from Norway, my good lord, Are joyfully return’d.	The ambassadors from Norway, my good lord, Are joyfully return’d.	The Norwegian ambassadors, my lord, have happily returned.

Hamlet’s lunacy	Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege, I hold my duty, as I hold my soul, Both to my God and to my gracious king: And I do think, or else this brain of mine Hunts not the trail of policy so sure As it hath used to do, that I have found The very cause of Hamlet’s lunacy.	Hamlet's madness

my good liege	Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege, I hold my duty, as I hold my soul, Both to my God and to my gracious king: And I do think, or else this brain of mine Hunts not the trail of policy so sure As it hath used to do, that I have found The very cause of Hamlet’s lunacy.	my good king

my gracious king	Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege, I hold my duty, as I hold my soul, Both to my God and to my gracious king: And I do think, or else this brain of mine Hunts not the trail of policy so sure As it hath used to do, that I have found The very cause of Hamlet’s lunacy.	my kind king

hold my duty, as I hold my soul, Both to my God and to my gracious king: And I do think, or else this brain of mine Hunts not the trail of policy so sure As it hath used to do, that I have found The very cause of Hamlet’s lunacy.	Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege, I hold my duty, as I hold my soul, Both to my God and to my gracious king: And I do think, or else this brain of mine Hunts not the trail of policy so sure As it hath used to do, that I have found The very cause of Hamlet’s lunacy.	I am as devoted to my duty as I am to my soul, both to God and to my king. And I think, unless my mind isn't as sharp as it used to be, I've discovered the real reason for Hamlet's madness.

that great feast	Give first admittance to the ambassadors; My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.	that important meeting

be the fruit to that great feast.	Give first admittance to the ambassadors; My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.	will be the best part of the feast.

first admittance	Give first admittance to the ambassadors; My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.	first meeting

(Exit Polonius	Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in. (Exit Polonius.) He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found The head and source of all your son’s distemper.	Polonius exits.

all your son’s distemper	(Exit Polonius.) He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found The head and source of all your son’s distemper.	everything that's wrong with your son

head and source of all your son’s distemper.	(Exit Polonius.) He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found The head and source of all your son’s distemper.	the cause of your son's madness.

our o’erhasty marriage	I doubt it is no other but the main; His father’s death, and our o’erhasty marriage.	our too-quick marriage

His father’s death	I doubt it is no other but the main; His father’s death, and our o’erhasty marriage.	His father died

His nephew’s levies	Most fair return of greetings and desires. Upon our first, he sent out to suppress His nephew’s levies; which to him appear’d To be a preparation ’gainst the Polack; But, better look’d into, he truly found It was against your highness: whereat grieved, That so his sickness, age and impotence Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests On Fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys; Receives rebuke from Norway, and in fine Makes vow before his uncle never more To give the assay of arms against your majesty. Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy, Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee, And his commission to employ those soldiers, So levied as before, against the Polack: With an entreaty, (Giving a paper.)	His nephew's army.

vow before his uncle never more To give the assay of arms against your majesty.	Most fair return of greetings and desires. Upon our first, he sent out to suppress His nephew’s levies; which to him appear’d To be a preparation ’gainst the Polack; But, better look’d into, he truly found It was against your highness: whereat grieved, That so his sickness, age and impotence Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests On Fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys; Receives rebuke from Norway, and in fine Makes vow before his uncle never more To give the assay of arms against your majesty. Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy, Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee, And his commission to employ those soldiers, So levied as before, against the Polack: With an entreaty, (Giving a paper.)	promised his uncle he would never again attack you.

overcome with joy, Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee, And his commission to employ those soldiers, So levied as before, against the Polack: With an entreaty, (Giving a paper.)	Upon our first, he sent out to suppress His nephew’s levies; which to him appear’d To be a preparation ’gainst the Polack; But, better look’d into, he truly found It was against your highness: whereat grieved, That so his sickness, age and impotence Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests On Fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys; Receives rebuke from Norway, and in fine Makes vow before his uncle never more To give the assay of arms against your majesty. Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy, Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee, And his commission to employ those soldiers, So levied as before, against the Polack: With an entreaty, (Giving a paper.) That it might please you to give quiet pass Through your dominions for this enterprise, On such regards of safety and allowance As therein are set down.	overcome with joy, gives him three thousand crowns a year, and permission to use those soldiers he raised earlier against Poland, with a request (giving a paper).

Whereon old Norway	Upon our first, he sent out to suppress His nephew’s levies; which to him appear’d To be a preparation ’gainst the Polack; But, better look’d into, he truly found It was against your highness: whereat grieved, That so his sickness, age and impotence Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests On Fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys; Receives rebuke from Norway, and in fine Makes vow before his uncle never more To give the assay of arms against your majesty. Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy, Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee, And his commission to employ those soldiers, So levied as before, against the Polack: With an entreaty, (Giving a paper.) That it might please you to give quiet pass Through your dominions for this enterprise, On such regards of safety and allowance As therein are set down.	Whereupon, the old King of Norway

give quiet pass Through your dominions for this enterprise, On such regards of safety and allowance As therein are set down.	Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy, Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee, And his commission to employ those soldiers, So levied as before, against the Polack: With an entreaty, (Giving a paper.) That it might please you to give quiet pass Through your dominions for this enterprise, On such regards of safety and allowance As therein are set down.	allow them safe passage through your lands for this mission, following the safety guidelines and permissions written here.

our more consider’d time	It likes us well; And at our more consider’d time well read, Answer, and think upon this business. Meantime we thank you for your well-took labour: Go to your rest; at night we’ll feast together: Most welcome home!	when we've had more time to think

Go to your rest; at night we’ll feast together: Most welcome home!	It likes us well; And at our more consider’d time well read, Answer, and think upon this business. Meantime we thank you for your well-took labour: Go to your rest; at night we’ll feast together: Most welcome home! (Exeunt Voltimand and Cornelius.)	Go get some rest; we'll have a feast together tonight. Welcome back!

(Exeunt Voltimand	Meantime we thank you for your well-took labour: Go to your rest; at night we’ll feast together: Most welcome home! (Exeunt Voltimand and Cornelius.)	(Voltimand and Cornelius exit.)

nothing but to waste night, day and time.	This business is well ended. My liege, and madam, to expostulate What majesty should be, what duty is, Why day is day, night night, and time is time, Were nothing but to waste night, day and time. Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit, And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes, I will be brief: your noble son is mad: Mad call I it; for, to define true madness, What is’t but to be nothing else but mad?	it would just be wasting time.

outward flourishes	My liege, and madam, to expostulate What majesty should be, what duty is, Why day is day, night night, and time is time, Were nothing but to waste night, day and time. Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit, And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes, I will be brief: your noble son is mad: Mad call I it; for, to define true madness, What is’t but to be nothing else but mad? But let that go.	unnecessary details

is the soul of wit, And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes, I will be brief: your noble son is mad: Mad call I it; for, to define true madness, What is’t but to be nothing else but mad?	My liege, and madam, to expostulate What majesty should be, what duty is, Why day is day, night night, and time is time, Were nothing but to waste night, day and time. Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit, And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes, I will be brief: your noble son is mad: Mad call I it; for, to define true madness, What is’t but to be nothing else but mad? But let that go.	Brevity is the essence of intelligence, and being long-winded is just showing off. I'll be brief: your son is mad. I call it madness because what else is madness but being completely mad?

tis ’tis	Madam, I swear I use no art at all. That he is mad, ’tis true: ’tis true ’tis pity; And pity ’tis ’tis true: a foolish figure; But farewell it, for I will use no art. Mad let us grant him, then: and now remains That we find out the cause of this effect, Or rather say, the cause of this defect, For this effect defective comes by cause: Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.	it is, it is

true ’tis pity	Madam, I swear I use no art at all. That he is mad, ’tis true: ’tis true ’tis pity; And pity ’tis ’tis true: a foolish figure; But farewell it, for I will use no art. Mad let us grant him, then: and now remains That we find out the cause of this effect, Or rather say, the cause of this defect, For this effect defective comes by cause: Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.	it's a shame that it's true

farewell it, for I will use no art.	Madam, I swear I use no art at all. That he is mad, ’tis true: ’tis true ’tis pity; And pity ’tis ’tis true: a foolish figure; But farewell it, for I will use no art. Mad let us grant him, then: and now remains That we find out the cause of this effect, Or rather say, the cause of this defect, For this effect defective comes by cause: Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.	Forget about that, I won't use any trickery.

a foolish figure	Madam, I swear I use no art at all. That he is mad, ’tis true: ’tis true ’tis pity; And pity ’tis ’tis true: a foolish figure; But farewell it, for I will use no art. Mad let us grant him, then: and now remains That we find out the cause of this effect, Or rather say, the cause of this defect, For this effect defective comes by cause: Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.	a silly thing to say

cause of this defect, For this effect defective comes by cause: Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.	That he is mad, ’tis true: ’tis true ’tis pity; And pity ’tis ’tis true: a foolish figure; But farewell it, for I will use no art. Mad let us grant him, then: and now remains That we find out the cause of this effect, Or rather say, the cause of this defect, For this effect defective comes by cause: Thus it remains, and the remainder thus. Perpend.	the cause of this problem, because this flawed result has a cause. That's the situation, and that's all there is to it.

have a daughter—have while she is mine— Who, in her duty and obedience, mark, Hath given me this: now gather, and surmise.	Perpend. I have a daughter—have while she is mine— Who, in her duty and obedience, mark, Hath given me this: now gather, and surmise. (Reads.)	I have a daughter—while she's still under my control—who, being dutiful and obedient, listen, has given me this: now pay attention and figure it out.

my soul’s idol	(Reads.) “To the celestial and my soul’s idol, the most beautified Ophelia,”—	the person I love most

the most beautified Ophelia	(Reads.) “To the celestial and my soul’s idol, the most beautified Ophelia,”—	The beautiful Ophelia

idol, the most beautified Ophelia,”—	(Reads.) “To the celestial and my soul’s idol, the most beautified Ophelia,”—	idol, the most beautiful Ophelia,"—

phrase, a vile phrase; “beautified” is a vile phrase: but you shall hear.	That’s an ill phrase, a vile phrase; “beautified” is a vile phrase: but you shall hear. Thus: (Reads.)	That's a terrible phrase, a disgusting phrase; "beautified" is a disgusting phrase: but you'll hear it.

a vile phrase	That’s an ill phrase, a vile phrase; “beautified” is a vile phrase: but you shall hear. Thus: (Reads.)	a terrible phrase

bosom, these, etc.”	Thus: (Reads.) “In her excellent white bosom, these, etc.”	bosom, and so on.

her excellent white bosom	Thus: (Reads.) “In her excellent white bosom, these, etc.”	her beautiful white breasts

Came this from Hamlet to her?	Came this from Hamlet to her?	Did this come from Hamlet to her?

Good madam	Good madam, stay awhile; I will be faithful. (Reads.)	Good madam

am ill at these numbers; I have not art to reckon my groans: but that I love thee best, O most best, believe it.	“O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers; I have not art to reckon my groans: but that I love thee best, O most best, believe it. Adieu.	I'm bad at expressing myself; I can't even count how much I'm suffering. But believe me, I love you more than anything, more than anything in the world.

evermore most dear lady	Adieu. “Thine evermore most dear lady, whilst this machine is to him, Hamlet.”	forever my dearest lady

him, Hamlet.”	Adieu. “Thine evermore most dear lady, whilst this machine is to him, Hamlet.”	him, Hamlet."

hath his solicitings, As they fell out by time, by means and place, All given to mine ear.	This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me, And more above, hath his solicitings, As they fell out by time, by means and place, All given to mine ear.	his requests, as they happened in time, by method, and location, have all been told to me.

how hath	But how hath she Received his love?	How has

As of a man faithful and honourable.	As of a man faithful and honourable.	Like a faithful and honorable man.

majesty your queen here, think, If I had play’d the desk or table-book, Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb, Or look’d upon this love with idle sight; What might you think?	I would fain prove so. But what might you think, When I had seen this hot love on the wing— As I perceived it, I must tell you that, Before my daughter told me—what might you, Or my dear majesty your queen here, think, If I had play’d the desk or table-book, Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb, Or look’d upon this love with idle sight; What might you think? No, I went round to work, And my young mistress thus I did bespeak: “Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star; This must not be:” and then I precepts gave her, That she should lock herself from his resort, Admit no messengers, receive no tokens.	What would you, or your queen, have thought if I had been passive, ignored my feelings, or overlooked this love? What would you have thought?

then I precepts	But what might you think, When I had seen this hot love on the wing— As I perceived it, I must tell you that, Before my daughter told me—what might you, Or my dear majesty your queen here, think, If I had play’d the desk or table-book, Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb, Or look’d upon this love with idle sight; What might you think? No, I went round to work, And my young mistress thus I did bespeak: “Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star; This must not be:” and then I precepts gave her, That she should lock herself from his resort, Admit no messengers, receive no tokens. Which done, she took the fruits of my advice; And he, repulsed—a short tale to make— Fell into a sadness, then into a fast, Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness, Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension, Into the madness wherein now he raves, And all we mourn for.	gave her, That she should lock herself from his resort, Admit no messengers, receive no tokens.

lock herself from his resort, Admit no messengers, receive no tokens.	But what might you think, When I had seen this hot love on the wing— As I perceived it, I must tell you that, Before my daughter told me—what might you, Or my dear majesty your queen here, think, If I had play’d the desk or table-book, Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb, Or look’d upon this love with idle sight; What might you think? No, I went round to work, And my young mistress thus I did bespeak: “Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star; This must not be:” and then I precepts gave her, That she should lock herself from his resort, Admit no messengers, receive no tokens. Which done, she took the fruits of my advice; And he, repulsed—a short tale to make— Fell into a sadness, then into a fast, Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness, Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension, Into the madness wherein now he raves, And all we mourn for.	stay away from him, don't allow any messengers, and don't accept any gifts.

into a fast, Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness, Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension, Into the madness wherein now he raves, And all we mourn for.	No, I went round to work, And my young mistress thus I did bespeak: “Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star; This must not be:” and then I precepts gave her, That she should lock herself from his resort, Admit no messengers, receive no tokens. Which done, she took the fruits of my advice; And he, repulsed—a short tale to make— Fell into a sadness, then into a fast, Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness, Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension, Into the madness wherein now he raves, And all we mourn for.	He stopped eating, then couldn't sleep, then became weak, then lightheaded, and this decline led him to the madness he's in now, which we all grieve over.

know that— That I have positively said “ ’Tis so,” When it proved otherwise?	Hath there been such a time—I’d fain know that— That I have positively said “ ’Tis so,” When it proved otherwise?	Has there ever been a time when I've confidently said "That's how it is," and it turned out to be wrong?

Take this from this, if this be otherwise: If circumstances lead me, I will find Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed Within the centre.	(Pointing to his head and shoulder.) Take this from this, if this be otherwise: If circumstances lead me, I will find Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed Within the centre.	I'll stake my head on this: If things go the way I expect, I'll find the truth no matter how deeply hidden.

assistant for a state, But keep a farm and carters.	At such a time I’ll loose my daughter to him: Be you and I behind an arras then; Mark the encounter: if he love her not And be not from his reason fall’n thereon, Let me be no assistant for a state, But keep a farm and carters.	Someone who helps run a country. Otherwise, I'll just be a farmer with wagons.

the poor wretch	But, look, where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.	the poor fellow

(Exeunt King	Away, I do beseech you, both away: I’ll board him presently. (Exeunt King, Queen, and Attendants.)	, Queen, and Attendants.)

King, Queen, and Attendants.)	Away, I do beseech you, both away: I’ll board him presently. (Exeunt King, Queen, and Attendants.)	King, Queen, and Attendants exit.

my good Lord Hamlet	O, give me leave: How does my good Lord Hamlet?	My good Lord Hamlet.

goes, is to be one man picked out of ten thousand.	Ay, sir; to be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man picked out of ten thousand.	Is so rare, it's like finding one honest person out of ten thousand.

breed maggots in a dead dog, being a god kissing carrion—Have you a daughter?	For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a god kissing carrion—Have you a daughter?	If the sun can create maggots in a rotting dead dog—do you have a daughter?

a god kissing carrion	For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a god kissing carrion—Have you a daughter?	God touching rotting flesh

is a blessing: but not as your daughter may conceive.	Let her not walk i’ the sun: conception is a blessing: but not as your daughter may conceive. Friend, look to’t.	is a blessing, but not in the way your daughter might become pregnant.

knew me not at first; he said I was a fishmonger: he is far gone, far gone: and truly in my youth I suffered much extremity for love; very near this.	How say you by that? Still harping on my daughter: yet he knew me not at first; he said I was a fishmonger: he is far gone, far gone: and truly in my youth I suffered much extremity for love; very near this. I’ll speak to him again.	Didn't recognize me at first; he said I was a fish seller. He's lost it, completely lost it. And honestly, when I was young, I suffered terribly for love, almost like he is now.

much extremity	How say you by that? Still harping on my daughter: yet he knew me not at first; he said I was a fishmonger: he is far gone, far gone: and truly in my youth I suffered much extremity for love; very near this. I’ll speak to him again.	great suffering

a plentiful lack	Slanders, sir: for the satirical rogue says here that old men have grey beards, that their faces are wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and plum-tree gum and that they have a plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak hams: all which, sir, though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I hold it not honesty to have it thus set down, for yourself, sir, should be old as I am, if like a crab you could go backward.	a complete absence

grey beards	Slanders, sir: for the satirical rogue says here that old men have grey beards, that their faces are wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and plum-tree gum and that they have a plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak hams: all which, sir, though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I hold it not honesty to have it thus set down, for yourself, sir, should be old as I am, if like a crab you could go backward.	grey beards

thick amber and plum-tree gum	Slanders, sir: for the satirical rogue says here that old men have grey beards, that their faces are wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and plum-tree gum and that they have a plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak hams: all which, sir, though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I hold it not honesty to have it thus set down, for yourself, sir, should be old as I am, if like a crab you could go backward.	eyes discharging thick, amber-colored fluid and plum-tree sap

am, if like a crab you could go backward.	Slanders, sir: for the satirical rogue says here that old men have grey beards, that their faces are wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and plum-tree gum and that they have a plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak hams: all which, sir, though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I hold it not honesty to have it thus set down, for yourself, sir, should be old as I am, if like a crab you could go backward.	am, if you could reverse aging like a crab walks backward.

the satirical rogue	Slanders, sir: for the satirical rogue says here that old men have grey beards, that their faces are wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and plum-tree gum and that they have a plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak hams: all which, sir, though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I hold it not honesty to have it thus set down, for yourself, sir, should be old as I am, if like a crab you could go backward.	the mocking rascal

be madness, yet there is method in’t.	(Aside.) Though this be madness, yet there is method in’t. Will you walk out of the air, my lord?	There's a method to his madness.

happiness that often madness hits on, which reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of.	How pregnant sometimes his replies are! a happiness that often madness hits on, which reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I will leave him, and suddenly contrive the means of meeting between him and my daughter.—My honourable lord, I will most humbly take my leave of you.	happiness that madness stumbles upon, which reason and sanity couldn't produce so successfully.

honourable lord	a happiness that often madness hits on, which reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I will leave him, and suddenly contrive the means of meeting between him and my daughter.—My honourable lord, I will most humbly take my leave of you.	My honorable lord.

take from me any thing that I will more willingly part withal: except my life, except my life, except my life.	You cannot, sir, take from me any thing that I will more willingly part withal: except my life, except my life, except my life.	You can't take anything from me that I'd rather give up, except my life, except my life, except my life.

These tedious old fools	These tedious old fools!	These tedious old fools

go to seek the Lord Hamlet; there he is.	You go to seek the Lord Hamlet; there he is.	Go look for Lord Hamlet; he's over there.

the Lord Hamlet	You go to seek the Lord Hamlet; there he is.	Lord Hamlet

(Exit Polonius	God save you, sir! (Exit Polonius.)	(Polonius exits.)

My honoured lord	My honoured lord!	My honored lord.

Good lads	Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do ye both?	Good lads

lads, how do ye both?	Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do ye both?	Friends, how are you both?

the indifferent children	As the indifferent children of the earth.	the uncaring children

fortune’s cap	Happy, in that we are not over-happy; On fortune’s cap we are not the very button.	the highest point of good luck

live about her waist, or in the middle of her favours?	Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her favours?	Do you live near her or are you in her good graces?

None, my lord, but that the world’s grown honest.	None, my lord, but that the world’s grown honest.	None, my lord, except that the world has become honest.

sends you to prison hither?	Then is doomsday near: but your news is not true. Let me question more in particular: what have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of fortune, that she sends you to prison hither?	Why has fortune sent you to this prison?

Denmark’s a prison	Denmark’s a prison.	Denmark's a prison.

many confines	A goodly one; in which there are many confines, wards and dungeons, Denmark being one o’ the worst.	many prisons

one; in which there are many confines, wards and dungeons, Denmark being one o’	A goodly one; in which there are many confines, wards and dungeons, Denmark being one o’ the worst.	one, where there are many prisons, cells, and dungeons, and Denmark is one of

king of infinite space, were it not that I have bad dreams.	O God, I could be bounded in a nut-shell and count myself a king of infinite space, were it not that I have bad dreams.	a king of endless possibilities, if only I didn't have nightmares.

a shadow’s shadow	Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light a quality that it is but a shadow’s shadow.	an illusion

quality that it is but a shadow’s shadow.	Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light a quality that it is but a shadow’s shadow.	so insignificant that it's like a shadow of a shadow.

monarchs and outstretched heroes the beggars’ shadows.	Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and outstretched heroes the beggars’ shadows. Shall we to the court?	Kings and great heroes are just shadows of beggars.

our beggars bodies	Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and outstretched heroes the beggars’ shadows. Shall we to the court?	our bodies are those of beggars

outstretched heroes	Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and outstretched heroes the beggars’ shadows. Shall we to the court?	exaggerated heroes

the beggars’ shadows	Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and outstretched heroes the beggars’ shadows. Shall we to the court?	the shadows of beggars

make you at Elsinore?	No such matter: I will not sort you with the rest of my servants, for, to speak to you like an honest man, I am most dreadfully attended. But, in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at Elsinore?	what are you doing in Elsinore?

too dear a halfpenny	Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; but I thank you: and sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent for?	worth more than a halfpenny

Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; but I thank you: and sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny.	Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; but I thank you: and sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent for?	Poor beggar that I am, I can't even afford proper thanks, but I thank you anyway. Honestly, my thanks aren't even worth a halfpenny.

a free visitation	Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation? Come, deal justly with me: come, come; nay, speak.	a spontaneous inspiration

deal justly with me: come, come; nay, speak.	Is it a free visitation? Come, deal justly with me: come, come; nay, speak.	Be fair with me; come on, speak up.

kind of confession in your looks which your modesties have not craft enough to colour: I know the good king and queen have sent for you.	Why, any thing, but to the purpose. You were sent for; and there is a kind of confession in your looks which your modesties have not craft enough to colour: I know the good king and queen have sent for you.	I see guilt in your faces that you're not clever enough to hide. I know the king and queen sent for you.

a better proposer	That you must teach me. But let me conjure you, by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved love, and by what more dear a better proposer could charge you withal, be even and direct with me, whether you were sent for, or no?	a better reason

be even and direct with me, whether you were sent for, or no?	That you must teach me. But let me conjure you, by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved love, and by what more dear a better proposer could charge you withal, be even and direct with me, whether you were sent for, or no?	Tell me straight, were you asked to come here, or not?

eye of you.—If you love me, hold not off.	(Aside.) Nay, then, I have an eye of you.—If you love me, hold not off.	I'm watching you.—If you love me, don't hesitate.

secrecy to the king and queen moult no feather.	I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the king and queen moult no feather. I have of late—but wherefore I know not—lost all my mirth, forgone all custom of exercises; and indeed it goes so heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame, the earth, seems to me a sterile promontory, this most excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o’erhanging firmament, this majestical roof fretted with golden fire, why, it appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours.	the king and queen won't find out anything.

a foul and pestilent congregation	I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the king and queen moult no feather. I have of late—but wherefore I know not—lost all my mirth, forgone all custom of exercises; and indeed it goes so heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame, the earth, seems to me a sterile promontory, this most excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o’erhanging firmament, this majestical roof fretted with golden fire, why, it appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours. What a piece of work is a man!	a disgusting and disease-ridden gathering

this majestical roof	I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the king and queen moult no feather. I have of late—but wherefore I know not—lost all my mirth, forgone all custom of exercises; and indeed it goes so heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame, the earth, seems to me a sterile promontory, this most excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o’erhanging firmament, this majestical roof fretted with golden fire, why, it appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours. What a piece of work is a man!	this magnificent sky

this goodly frame	I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the king and queen moult no feather. I have of late—but wherefore I know not—lost all my mirth, forgone all custom of exercises; and indeed it goes so heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame, the earth, seems to me a sterile promontory, this most excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o’erhanging firmament, this majestical roof fretted with golden fire, why, it appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours. What a piece of work is a man!	this beautiful world

this most excellent canopy	I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the king and queen moult no feather. I have of late—but wherefore I know not—lost all my mirth, forgone all custom of exercises; and indeed it goes so heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame, the earth, seems to me a sterile promontory, this most excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o’erhanging firmament, this majestical roof fretted with golden fire, why, it appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours. What a piece of work is a man!	this wonderful sky

a sterile promontory	I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the king and queen moult no feather. I have of late—but wherefore I know not—lost all my mirth, forgone all custom of exercises; and indeed it goes so heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame, the earth, seems to me a sterile promontory, this most excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o’erhanging firmament, this majestical roof fretted with golden fire, why, it appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours. What a piece of work is a man!	a barren cliff

this brave o’erhanging firmament	I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the king and queen moult no feather. I have of late—but wherefore I know not—lost all my mirth, forgone all custom of exercises; and indeed it goes so heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame, the earth, seems to me a sterile promontory, this most excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o’erhanging firmament, this majestical roof fretted with golden fire, why, it appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours. What a piece of work is a man!	this amazing sky overhead

all my mirth	I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the king and queen moult no feather. I have of late—but wherefore I know not—lost all my mirth, forgone all custom of exercises; and indeed it goes so heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame, the earth, seems to me a sterile promontory, this most excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o’erhanging firmament, this majestical roof fretted with golden fire, why, it appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours. What a piece of work is a man!	all my happiness

roof fretted with golden fire, why, it appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours.	I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the king and queen moult no feather. I have of late—but wherefore I know not—lost all my mirth, forgone all custom of exercises; and indeed it goes so heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame, the earth, seems to me a sterile promontory, this most excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o’erhanging firmament, this majestical roof fretted with golden fire, why, it appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours. What a piece of work is a man!	the roof decorated with golden stars seems to me like nothing more than a disgusting and disease-ridden cloud of gas.

paragon of animals!	the beauty of the world! the paragon of animals! And yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust?	Perfect example of animals!

quintessence of dust?	the paragon of animals! And yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust? man delights not me: no, nor woman neither, though by your smiling you seem to say so.	Perfect example of dust?

coming, to offer you service.	To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what lenten entertainment the players shall receive from you: we coted them on the way; and hither are they coming, to offer you service.	coming to perform for you.

what lenten entertainment	To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what lenten entertainment the players shall receive from you: we coted them on the way; and hither are they coming, to offer you service.	what poor reception

the adventurous knight	He that plays the king shall be welcome; his majesty shall have tribute of me; the adventurous knight shall use his foil and target; the lover shall not sigh gratis; the humourous man shall end his part in peace; the clown shall make those laugh whose lungs are tickled o’ the sere; and the lady shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall halt for’t. What players are they?	the knight who seeks adventure

the humourous man	He that plays the king shall be welcome; his majesty shall have tribute of me; the adventurous knight shall use his foil and target; the lover shall not sigh gratis; the humourous man shall end his part in peace; the clown shall make those laugh whose lungs are tickled o’ the sere; and the lady shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall halt for’t. What players are they?	the comedian

tribute of me; the adventurous knight shall use his foil and target; the lover shall not sigh gratis; the humourous man shall end his part in peace; the clown shall make those laugh whose lungs are tickled o’ the sere; and the lady shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall halt for’t.	He that plays the king shall be welcome; his majesty shall have tribute of me; the adventurous knight shall use his foil and target; the lover shall not sigh gratis; the humourous man shall end his part in peace; the clown shall make those laugh whose lungs are tickled o’ the sere; and the lady shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall halt for’t. What players are they?	I'll give him tribute; the adventurous knight shall use his sword and shield; the lover won't sigh for nothing; the funny man will finish his part without trouble; the clown will make those with easily amused lungs laugh; and the lady will speak her mind freely, or the poetry will suffer for it.

those you were wont to take delight in, the tragedians of the city.	Even those you were wont to take delight in, the tragedians of the city.	the city's tragedians you used to enjoy.

comes by the means of the late innovation.	I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late innovation.	is due to the recent innovation.

estimation they did when I was in the city?	Do they hold the same estimation they did when I was in the city? are they so followed?	The same reputation they had when I was in the city?

the wonted pace	Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace: but there is, sir, an aery of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top of question, and are most tyrannically clapped for’t: these are now the fashion, and so berattle the common stages—so they call them—that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goose-quills and dare scarce come thither.	the usual speed

many wearing rapiers	Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace: but there is, sir, an aery of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top of question, and are most tyrannically clapped for’t: these are now the fashion, and so berattle the common stages—so they call them—that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goose-quills and dare scarce come thither.	Many men who wear swords

little eyases	Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace: but there is, sir, an aery of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top of question, and are most tyrannically clapped for’t: these are now the fashion, and so berattle the common stages—so they call them—that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goose-quills and dare scarce come thither.	young hawks

afraid of goose-quills and dare scarce come thither.	Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace: but there is, sir, an aery of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top of question, and are most tyrannically clapped for’t: these are now the fashion, and so berattle the common stages—so they call them—that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goose-quills and dare scarce come thither.	afraid of writers and barely dare go there.

so berattle	Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace: but there is, sir, an aery of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top of question, and are most tyrannically clapped for’t: these are now the fashion, and so berattle the common stages—so they call them—that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goose-quills and dare scarce come thither.	so criticize

do them wrong, to make them exclaim against their own succession?	Will they pursue the quality no longer than they can sing? will they not say afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common players—as it is most like, if their means are no better—their writers do them wrong, to make them exclaim against their own succession?	wrong them by making them speak out against becoming actors?

their own succession	Will they pursue the quality no longer than they can sing? will they not say afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common players—as it is most like, if their means are no better—their writers do them wrong, to make them exclaim against their own succession?	their own future

tarre them to controversy: there was, for a while, no money bid for argument, unless the poet and the player went to cuffs in the question.	’Faith, there has been much to do on both sides; and the nation holds it no sin to tarre them to controversy: there was, for a while, no money bid for argument, unless the poet and the player went to cuffs in the question.	stir them up to argue: for a time, no one would pay for a debate unless the poet and actor came to blows over the issue.

lord; Hercules and his load too.	Ay, that they do, my lord; Hercules and his load too.	Yes, they do, my lord; like Hercules carrying the world.

an hundred ducats	It is not very strange; for mine uncle is king of Denmark, and those that would make mows at him while my father lived, give twenty, forty, fifty, an hundred ducats a-piece for his picture in little. ’ Sblood, there is something in this more than natural, if philosophy could find it out.	one hundred ducats

give twenty, forty, fifty, an hundred ducats a-piece for his picture in little. ’	It is not very strange; for mine uncle is king of Denmark, and those that would make mows at him while my father lived, give twenty, forty, fifty, an hundred ducats a-piece for his picture in little. ’ Sblood, there is something in this more than natural, if philosophy could find it out.	pay twenty, forty, fifty, even a hundred ducats each for a miniature portrait of him.

Flourish of trumpets within.)	Sblood, there is something in this more than natural, if philosophy could find it out. (Flourish of trumpets within.)	Trumpets are playing inside.

welcome to Elsinore.	Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore. Your hands, come then: the appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony: let me comply with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players, which, I tell you, must show fairly outward, should more appear like entertainment than yours.	Welcome to Elsinore.

players, which, I tell you, must show fairly outward, should more appear like entertainment than yours.	Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore. Your hands, come then: the appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony: let me comply with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players, which, I tell you, must show fairly outward, should more appear like entertainment than yours. You are welcome: but my uncle-father and aunt-mother are deceived.	the way I treat the actors, which I assure you I must make a public show of, doesn't overshadow my welcome to you.

my uncle-father and aunt-mother	Your hands, come then: the appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony: let me comply with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players, which, I tell you, must show fairly outward, should more appear like entertainment than yours. You are welcome: but my uncle-father and aunt-mother are deceived.	my uncle and aunt

am but mad north-north-west: when the wind is southerly I know a hawk from a handsaw.	I am but mad north-north-west: when the wind is southerly I know a hawk from a handsaw.	I'm only crazy sometimes: at other times I know what's what.

his swaddling-clouts	Hark you, Guildenstern; and you too: at each ear a hearer: that great baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling-clouts.	his baby clothes

baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling-clouts.	Hark you, Guildenstern; and you too: at each ear a hearer: that great baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling-clouts.	the baby you see hasn't grown up yet.

tell me of the players; mark it.	I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players; mark it. You say right, sir: o’ Monday morning; ’twas so indeed.	He's going to tell me about the actors; you watch.

Buz, buz!	Buz, buz!	Buzz, buzz!

mine honour	Upon mine honour—	my word

pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral, tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable	The best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral, tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or poem unlimited: Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty, these are the only men.	country plays, country plays with jokes, history plays in the countryside, sad history plays, a mix of sad, funny, history plays in the countryside, plays that don't fit neatly into categories

actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral, tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or poem unlimited: Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor Plautus too light.	The best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral, tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or poem unlimited: Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty, these are the only men.	actors, whether in tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral plays, or any combination of these, whether short scenes or long poems: Seneca is serious enough and Plautus funny enough.

O Jephthah	O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou!	O Jephthah

Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou!	O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou!	Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure you had!

, old Jephthah	Am I not i’ the right, old Jephthah?	old Jephthah

right, old Jephthah?	Am I not i’ the right, old Jephthah?	Am I not right, like old Jephthah?

daughter that I love passing well.	If you call me Jephthah, my lord, I have a daughter that I love passing well.	daughter that I love very much.

Nay, that follows not.	Nay, that follows not.	No, that doesn't follow.

As by lot, God wot,”	Why, “As by lot, God wot,”	As God knows, it was by chance.

row of the pious chanson will show you more; for look, where my abridgement comes.	the first row of the pious chanson will show you more; for look, where my abridgement comes.	The first line of the religious song will tell you more; look, here comes my summary.

the pious chanson	the first row of the pious chanson will show you more; for look, where my abridgement comes.	religious song

thou to beard me in Denmark?	O, my old friend! thy face is valanced since I saw thee last: comest thou to beard me in Denmark? What, my young lady and mistress!	Are you trying to challenge me even here in Denmark?

altitude of a chopine.	What, my young lady and mistress! By’r lady, your ladyship is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by the altitude of a chopine. Pray God, your voice, like apiece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the ring.	The height of a platform shoe.

By’r lady	What, my young lady and mistress! By’r lady, your ladyship is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by the altitude of a chopine. Pray God, your voice, like apiece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the ring.	By our lady

uncurrent gold	By’r lady, your ladyship is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by the altitude of a chopine. Pray God, your voice, like apiece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the ring. Masters, you are all welcome.	counterfeit gold

apiece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the ring.	By’r lady, your ladyship is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by the altitude of a chopine. Pray God, your voice, like apiece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the ring. Masters, you are all welcome.	May your voice not be damaged or flawed.

fly at any thing we see: we’ll have a speech straight: come, give us a taste of your quality; come, a passionate speech.	Masters, you are all welcome. We’ll e’en to’t like French falconers, fly at any thing we see: we’ll have a speech straight: come, give us a taste of your quality; come, a passionate speech.	go after anything that catches our eye. We want a speech right away. Come on, show us what you're capable of; give us a passionate speech.

French falconers	Masters, you are all welcome. We’ll e’en to’t like French falconers, fly at any thing we see: we’ll have a speech straight: come, give us a taste of your quality; come, a passionate speech.	French falconers

as much modesty	I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted; or, if it was, not above once; for the play, I remember, pleased not the million; ’twas caviare to the general: but it was—as I received it, and others, whose judgments in such matters cried in the top of mine—an excellent play, well digested in the scenes, set down with as much modesty as cunning. I remember, one said there were no sallets in the lines to make the matter savoury, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict the author of affectation; but called it an honest method, as wholesome as sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine.	as much restraint

pleased not the million; ’twas caviare to the general: but it was—as I received it, and others, whose judgments in such matters cried in the top of mine—an excellent play, well digested in the scenes, set down with as much modesty as cunning.	I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted; or, if it was, not above once; for the play, I remember, pleased not the million; ’twas caviare to the general: but it was—as I received it, and others, whose judgments in such matters cried in the top of mine—an excellent play, well digested in the scenes, set down with as much modesty as cunning. I remember, one said there were no sallets in the lines to make the matter savoury, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict the author of affectation; but called it an honest method, as wholesome as sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine.	the common people didn't like it; it was too sophisticated for them. But I thought—and others with better judgment agreed—it was an excellent play, well-structured and written with both restraint and skill.

phrase that might indict the author of affectation; but called it an honest method, as wholesome as sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine.	I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted; or, if it was, not above once; for the play, I remember, pleased not the million; ’twas caviare to the general: but it was—as I received it, and others, whose judgments in such matters cried in the top of mine—an excellent play, well digested in the scenes, set down with as much modesty as cunning. I remember, one said there were no sallets in the lines to make the matter savoury, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict the author of affectation; but called it an honest method, as wholesome as sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine. One speech in it I chiefly loved: ’twas Aeneas’ tale to Dido; and thereabout of it especially, where he speaks of Priam’s slaughter: if it live in your memory, begin at this line: let me see, let me see— “The rugged Pyrrhus, like the Hyrcanian beast,”—	phrasing that suggested the author was trying too hard to impress. Instead, they called it genuine, both pleasant and beneficial, and much more tasteful than showy.

The rugged Pyrrhus	I remember, one said there were no sallets in the lines to make the matter savoury, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict the author of affectation; but called it an honest method, as wholesome as sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine. One speech in it I chiefly loved: ’twas Aeneas’ tale to Dido; and thereabout of it especially, where he speaks of Priam’s slaughter: if it live in your memory, begin at this line: let me see, let me see— “The rugged Pyrrhus, like the Hyrcanian beast,”—	The rough Pyrrhus

Priam’s slaughter	I remember, one said there were no sallets in the lines to make the matter savoury, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict the author of affectation; but called it an honest method, as wholesome as sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine. One speech in it I chiefly loved: ’twas Aeneas’ tale to Dido; and thereabout of it especially, where he speaks of Priam’s slaughter: if it live in your memory, begin at this line: let me see, let me see— “The rugged Pyrrhus, like the Hyrcanian beast,”—	The killing of Priam

the Hyrcanian beast	I remember, one said there were no sallets in the lines to make the matter savoury, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict the author of affectation; but called it an honest method, as wholesome as sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine. One speech in it I chiefly loved: ’twas Aeneas’ tale to Dido; and thereabout of it especially, where he speaks of Priam’s slaughter: if it live in your memory, begin at this line: let me see, let me see— “The rugged Pyrrhus, like the Hyrcanian beast,”—	the Hyrcanian beast

thereabout of it especially, where he speaks of Priam’s slaughter: if it live in your memory, begin at this line: let me see, let me see— “The rugged Pyrrhus, like the Hyrcanian beast,”—	I remember, one said there were no sallets in the lines to make the matter savoury, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict the author of affectation; but called it an honest method, as wholesome as sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine. One speech in it I chiefly loved: ’twas Aeneas’ tale to Dido; and thereabout of it especially, where he speaks of Priam’s slaughter: if it live in your memory, begin at this line: let me see, let me see— “The rugged Pyrrhus, like the Hyrcanian beast,”—	especially the part where he talks about Priam's killing. If you remember it, start at this line: let me see, let me see— “The rugged Pyrrhus, like the Hyrcanian beast,”—

Aeneas’ tale	I remember, one said there were no sallets in the lines to make the matter savoury, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict the author of affectation; but called it an honest method, as wholesome as sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine. One speech in it I chiefly loved: ’twas Aeneas’ tale to Dido; and thereabout of it especially, where he speaks of Priam’s slaughter: if it live in your memory, begin at this line: let me see, let me see— “The rugged Pyrrhus, like the Hyrcanian beast,”—	Aeneas' story

a tyrannous and damned light	—it is not so:—it begins with Pyrrhus:— “The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms, Black as his purpose, did the night resemble When he lay couched in the ominous horse, Hath now this dread and black complexion smear’d With heraldry more dismal; head to foot Now is he total gules; horridly trick’d With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, Baked and impasted with the parching streets, That lend a tyrannous and damned light To their lord’s murder: roasted in wrath and fire, And thus o’er-sized with coagulate gore, With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus Old grandsire Priam seeks.”	a cruel and evil light

the ominous horse	—it is not so:—it begins with Pyrrhus:— “The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms, Black as his purpose, did the night resemble When he lay couched in the ominous horse, Hath now this dread and black complexion smear’d With heraldry more dismal; head to foot Now is he total gules; horridly trick’d With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, Baked and impasted with the parching streets, That lend a tyrannous and damned light To their lord’s murder: roasted in wrath and fire, And thus o’er-sized with coagulate gore, With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus Old grandsire Priam seeks.”	the fateful horse

now this dread	—it is not so:—it begins with Pyrrhus:— “The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms, Black as his purpose, did the night resemble When he lay couched in the ominous horse, Hath now this dread and black complexion smear’d With heraldry more dismal; head to foot Now is he total gules; horridly trick’d With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, Baked and impasted with the parching streets, That lend a tyrannous and damned light To their lord’s murder: roasted in wrath and fire, And thus o’er-sized with coagulate gore, With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus Old grandsire Priam seeks.”	now this terrifying

couched in the ominous horse, Hath now this dread and black complexion smear’d With heraldry more dismal; head to foot Now is he total gules; horridly trick’d With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, Baked and impasted with the parching streets, That lend a tyrannous and damned light To their lord’s murder: roasted in wrath and fire, And thus o’er-sized with coagulate gore, With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus Old grandsire Priam seeks.”	—it is not so:—it begins with Pyrrhus:— “The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms, Black as his purpose, did the night resemble When he lay couched in the ominous horse, Hath now this dread and black complexion smear’d With heraldry more dismal; head to foot Now is he total gules; horridly trick’d With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, Baked and impasted with the parching streets, That lend a tyrannous and damned light To their lord’s murder: roasted in wrath and fire, And thus o’er-sized with coagulate gore, With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus Old grandsire Priam seeks.”	hidden in the deadly horse, now has his terrifying black appearance smeared with even more awful symbols; he is completely red from head to toe, horribly decorated with the blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, and sons, dried and caked on him along with the scorching streets that offer a cruel and evil light to their king's murder: burned in anger and fire, and thus covered in clotted blood, with eyes like glowing coals, the hellish Pyrrhus seeks old grandfather Priam.

their lord’s murder	—it is not so:—it begins with Pyrrhus:— “The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms, Black as his purpose, did the night resemble When he lay couched in the ominous horse, Hath now this dread and black complexion smear’d With heraldry more dismal; head to foot Now is he total gules; horridly trick’d With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, Baked and impasted with the parching streets, That lend a tyrannous and damned light To their lord’s murder: roasted in wrath and fire, And thus o’er-sized with coagulate gore, With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus Old grandsire Priam seeks.”	the killing of their king

— “The rugged Pyrrhus	—it is not so:—it begins with Pyrrhus:— “The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms, Black as his purpose, did the night resemble When he lay couched in the ominous horse, Hath now this dread and black complexion smear’d With heraldry more dismal; head to foot Now is he total gules; horridly trick’d With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, Baked and impasted with the parching streets, That lend a tyrannous and damned light To their lord’s murder: roasted in wrath and fire, And thus o’er-sized with coagulate gore, With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus Old grandsire Priam seeks.”	The tough Pyrrhus

whose sable arms	—it is not so:—it begins with Pyrrhus:— “The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms, Black as his purpose, did the night resemble When he lay couched in the ominous horse, Hath now this dread and black complexion smear’d With heraldry more dismal; head to foot Now is he total gules; horridly trick’d With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, Baked and impasted with the parching streets, That lend a tyrannous and damned light To their lord’s murder: roasted in wrath and fire, And thus o’er-sized with coagulate gore, With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus Old grandsire Priam seeks.”	whose black armor

the hellish Pyrrhus Old grandsire	—it is not so:—it begins with Pyrrhus:— “The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms, Black as his purpose, did the night resemble When he lay couched in the ominous horse, Hath now this dread and black complexion smear’d With heraldry more dismal; head to foot Now is he total gules; horridly trick’d With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, Baked and impasted with the parching streets, That lend a tyrannous and damned light To their lord’s murder: roasted in wrath and fire, And thus o’er-sized with coagulate gore, With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus Old grandsire Priam seeks.”	The devilish Pyrrhus seeks old grandfather

the parching streets	—it is not so:—it begins with Pyrrhus:— “The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms, Black as his purpose, did the night resemble When he lay couched in the ominous horse, Hath now this dread and black complexion smear’d With heraldry more dismal; head to foot Now is he total gules; horridly trick’d With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, Baked and impasted with the parching streets, That lend a tyrannous and damned light To their lord’s murder: roasted in wrath and fire, And thus o’er-sized with coagulate gore, With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus Old grandsire Priam seeks.”	the burning streets

black complexion	—it is not so:—it begins with Pyrrhus:— “The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms, Black as his purpose, did the night resemble When he lay couched in the ominous horse, Hath now this dread and black complexion smear’d With heraldry more dismal; head to foot Now is he total gules; horridly trick’d With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, Baked and impasted with the parching streets, That lend a tyrannous and damned light To their lord’s murder: roasted in wrath and fire, And thus o’er-sized with coagulate gore, With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus Old grandsire Priam seeks.”	dark appearance

God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good discretion.	’Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good discretion.	My lord, you speak well, with good accent and judgment.

’Fore God	’Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good discretion.	Honestly.

unequal match’d	“Anon he finds him Striking too short at Greeks; his antique sword, Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls, Repugnant to command: unequal match’d, Pyrrhus at Priam drives; in rage strikes wide; But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword The unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium, Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash Takes prisoner Pyrrhus’ ear: for, lo!	Unequally matched.

The unnerved father	“Anon he finds him Striking too short at Greeks; his antique sword, Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls, Repugnant to command: unequal match’d, Pyrrhus at Priam drives; in rage strikes wide; But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword The unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium, Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash Takes prisoner Pyrrhus’ ear: for, lo!	The weakened old man

lies where it falls, Repugnant to command: unequal match’d, Pyrrhus at Priam drives; in rage strikes wide; But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword The unnerved father falls.	“Anon he finds him Striking too short at Greeks; his antique sword, Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls, Repugnant to command: unequal match’d, Pyrrhus at Priam drives; in rage strikes wide; But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword The unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium, Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash Takes prisoner Pyrrhus’ ear: for, lo!	lies where it falls, refusing to obey his command. Pyrrhus, in an unfair fight, attacks Priam; he swings wildly in rage, but even the breeze from his deadly sword is enough to make the weakened old man fall.

Then senseless Ilium	“Anon he finds him Striking too short at Greeks; his antique sword, Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls, Repugnant to command: unequal match’d, Pyrrhus at Priam drives; in rage strikes wide; But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword The unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium, Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash Takes prisoner Pyrrhus’ ear: for, lo! his sword, Which was declining on the milky head Of reverend Priam, seem’d i’ the air to stick:	Then unfeeling Troy

flaming top Stoops	“Anon he finds him Striking too short at Greeks; his antique sword, Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls, Repugnant to command: unequal match’d, Pyrrhus at Priam drives; in rage strikes wide; But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword The unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium, Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash Takes prisoner Pyrrhus’ ear: for, lo! his sword, Which was declining on the milky head Of reverend Priam, seem’d i’ the air to stick:	flaming peak falls

a hideous crash	“Anon he finds him Striking too short at Greeks; his antique sword, Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls, Repugnant to command: unequal match’d, Pyrrhus at Priam drives; in rage strikes wide; But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword The unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium, Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash Takes prisoner Pyrrhus’ ear: for, lo! his sword, Which was declining on the milky head Of reverend Priam, seem’d i’ the air to stick:	a terrible crash

prisoner Pyrrhus	“Anon he finds him Striking too short at Greeks; his antique sword, Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls, Repugnant to command: unequal match’d, Pyrrhus at Priam drives; in rage strikes wide; But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword The unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium, Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash Takes prisoner Pyrrhus’ ear: for, lo! his sword, Which was declining on the milky head Of reverend Priam, seem’d i’ the air to stick:	captures Pyrrhus' ear

Ilium, Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash Takes prisoner Pyrrhus’ ear: for, lo!	“Anon he finds him Striking too short at Greeks; his antique sword, Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls, Repugnant to command: unequal match’d, Pyrrhus at Priam drives; in rage strikes wide; But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword The unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium, Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash Takes prisoner Pyrrhus’ ear: for, lo! his sword, Which was declining on the milky head Of reverend Priam, seem’d i’ the air to stick:	Troy, as if feeling this blow, collapses from its burning summit to its foundation, and with a terrible crash assaults Pyrrhus's ears: because, look!

declining on the milky head Of reverend Priam, seem’d i’ the air to stick:	Then senseless Ilium, Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash Takes prisoner Pyrrhus’ ear: for, lo! his sword, Which was declining on the milky head Of reverend Priam, seem’d i’ the air to stick: So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood, And like a neutral to his will and matter, Did nothing.	aimed at old Priam's white head, seemed to freeze in the air.

reverend Priam	Then senseless Ilium, Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash Takes prisoner Pyrrhus’ ear: for, lo! his sword, Which was declining on the milky head Of reverend Priam, seem’d i’ the air to stick: So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood, And like a neutral to his will and matter, Did nothing.	respected Priam

the milky head	Then senseless Ilium, Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash Takes prisoner Pyrrhus’ ear: for, lo! his sword, Which was declining on the milky head Of reverend Priam, seem’d i’ the air to stick: So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood, And like a neutral to his will and matter, Did nothing.	the white head

stood, And like a neutral to his will and matter, Did nothing.	his sword, Which was declining on the milky head Of reverend Priam, seem’d i’ the air to stick: So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood, And like a neutral to his will and matter, Did nothing. But, as we often see, against some storm, A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still, The bold winds speechless and the orb below As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder Doth rend the region, so, after Pyrrhus’ pause, Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work; And never did the Cyclops’ hammers fall On Mars’s armour forged for proof eterne With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword Now falls on Priam.	stood there, appearing indifferent to what he wanted to do and what was happening, and did nothing.

a painted tyrant	his sword, Which was declining on the milky head Of reverend Priam, seem’d i’ the air to stick: So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood, And like a neutral to his will and matter, Did nothing. But, as we often see, against some storm, A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still, The bold winds speechless and the orb below As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder Doth rend the region, so, after Pyrrhus’ pause, Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work; And never did the Cyclops’ hammers fall On Mars’s armour forged for proof eterne With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword Now falls on Priam.	a tyrant in a painting

anon the dreadful thunder	So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood, And like a neutral to his will and matter, Did nothing. But, as we often see, against some storm, A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still, The bold winds speechless and the orb below As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder Doth rend the region, so, after Pyrrhus’ pause, Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work; And never did the Cyclops’ hammers fall On Mars’s armour forged for proof eterne With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword Now falls on Priam. Out, out, thou strumpet, Fortune!	then suddenly, the terrible thunder

Aroused vengeance	So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood, And like a neutral to his will and matter, Did nothing. But, as we often see, against some storm, A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still, The bold winds speechless and the orb below As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder Doth rend the region, so, after Pyrrhus’ pause, Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work; And never did the Cyclops’ hammers fall On Mars’s armour forged for proof eterne With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword Now falls on Priam. Out, out, thou strumpet, Fortune!	Awakened revenge

the Cyclops’ hammers	So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood, And like a neutral to his will and matter, Did nothing. But, as we often see, against some storm, A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still, The bold winds speechless and the orb below As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder Doth rend the region, so, after Pyrrhus’ pause, Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work; And never did the Cyclops’ hammers fall On Mars’s armour forged for proof eterne With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword Now falls on Priam. Out, out, thou strumpet, Fortune!	the hammers of the Cyclops

less remorse	So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood, And like a neutral to his will and matter, Did nothing. But, as we often see, against some storm, A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still, The bold winds speechless and the orb below As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder Doth rend the region, so, after Pyrrhus’ pause, Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work; And never did the Cyclops’ hammers fall On Mars’s armour forged for proof eterne With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword Now falls on Priam. Out, out, thou strumpet, Fortune!	less pity

orb below As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder Doth rend the region, so, after Pyrrhus’ pause, Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work; And never did the Cyclops’ hammers fall On Mars’s armour forged for proof eterne With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword Now falls on Priam.	So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood, And like a neutral to his will and matter, Did nothing. But, as we often see, against some storm, A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still, The bold winds speechless and the orb below As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder Doth rend the region, so, after Pyrrhus’ pause, Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work; And never did the Cyclops’ hammers fall On Mars’s armour forged for proof eterne With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword Now falls on Priam. Out, out, thou strumpet, Fortune!	the world below is as silent as death, then suddenly, terrible thunder rips through the sky, similarly, after Pyrrhus's pause, awakened revenge drives him back into action; and the Cyclops' hammers never struck Mars's armor, made to last forever, with less mercy than Pyrrhus's bloody sword now strikes Priam.

Mars’s armour	So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood, And like a neutral to his will and matter, Did nothing. But, as we often see, against some storm, A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still, The bold winds speechless and the orb below As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder Doth rend the region, so, after Pyrrhus’ pause, Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work; And never did the Cyclops’ hammers fall On Mars’s armour forged for proof eterne With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword Now falls on Priam. Out, out, thou strumpet, Fortune!	armor made for Mars

Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword	So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood, And like a neutral to his will and matter, Did nothing. But, as we often see, against some storm, A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still, The bold winds speechless and the orb below As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder Doth rend the region, so, after Pyrrhus’ pause, Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work; And never did the Cyclops’ hammers fall On Mars’s armour forged for proof eterne With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword Now falls on Priam. Out, out, thou strumpet, Fortune!	Pyrrhus' bloody sword

Pyrrhus’ pause	So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood, And like a neutral to his will and matter, Did nothing. But, as we often see, against some storm, A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still, The bold winds speechless and the orb below As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder Doth rend the region, so, after Pyrrhus’ pause, Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work; And never did the Cyclops’ hammers fall On Mars’s armour forged for proof eterne With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword Now falls on Priam. Out, out, thou strumpet, Fortune!	Pyrrhus's hesitation

strumpet, Fortune!	But, as we often see, against some storm, A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still, The bold winds speechless and the orb below As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder Doth rend the region, so, after Pyrrhus’ pause, Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work; And never did the Cyclops’ hammers fall On Mars’s armour forged for proof eterne With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword Now falls on Priam. Out, out, thou strumpet, Fortune! All you gods, In general synod take away her power; Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel, And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven, As low as to the fiends!”	whore, Fortune!

take away her power; Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel, And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven, As low as to the fiends!”	Out, out, thou strumpet, Fortune! All you gods, In general synod take away her power; Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel, And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven, As low as to the fiends!”	take away her power, destroy her wheel, and send it rolling down from heaven all the way to hell!

the round nave	Out, out, thou strumpet, Fortune! All you gods, In general synod take away her power; Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel, And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven, As low as to the fiends!”	the round center part

general synod	Out, out, thou strumpet, Fortune! All you gods, In general synod take away her power; Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel, And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven, As low as to the fiends!”	general assembly

shall to the barber’s, with your beard.	It shall to the barber’s, with your beard. Prithee, say on: he’s for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps: say on: come to Hecuba.	Go to the barber and get your beard trimmed.

tale of bawdry, or he sleeps: say on: come to Hecuba.	It shall to the barber’s, with your beard. Prithee, say on: he’s for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps: say on: come to Hecuba.	a dirty story, or he's asleep: go on: get to Hecuba.

the mobled queen	“But who, O, who had seen the mobled queen—”	the muffled queen

O, who had seen the mobled queen—”	“But who, O, who had seen the mobled queen—”	Oh, who had seen the muffled queen?

“The mobled queen	“The mobled queen?”	The muffled queen?

“mobled queen	That’s good; “mobled queen” is good.	distressed queen

Gainst Fortune’s state	“Run barefoot up and down, threatening the flames With bisson rheum; a clout upon that head Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe, About her lank and all o’er-teemed loins, A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up; Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep’d, ’Gainst Fortune’s state would treason have pronounced: But if the gods themselves did see her then When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport In mincing with his sword her husband’s limbs, The instant burst of clamour that she made, Unless things mortal move them not at all, Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven, And passion in the gods.”	Against the power of Fortune

venom steep’d	“Run barefoot up and down, threatening the flames With bisson rheum; a clout upon that head Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe, About her lank and all o’er-teemed loins, A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up; Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep’d, ’Gainst Fortune’s state would treason have pronounced: But if the gods themselves did see her then When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport In mincing with his sword her husband’s limbs, The instant burst of clamour that she made, Unless things mortal move them not at all, Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven, And passion in the gods.”	full of venom

her husband’s limbs	“Run barefoot up and down, threatening the flames With bisson rheum; a clout upon that head Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe, About her lank and all o’er-teemed loins, A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up; Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep’d, ’Gainst Fortune’s state would treason have pronounced: But if the gods themselves did see her then When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport In mincing with his sword her husband’s limbs, The instant burst of clamour that she made, Unless things mortal move them not at all, Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven, And passion in the gods.”	her husband's body parts

malicious sport	“Run barefoot up and down, threatening the flames With bisson rheum; a clout upon that head Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe, About her lank and all o’er-teemed loins, A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up; Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep’d, ’Gainst Fortune’s state would treason have pronounced: But if the gods themselves did see her then When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport In mincing with his sword her husband’s limbs, The instant burst of clamour that she made, Unless things mortal move them not at all, Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven, And passion in the gods.”	cruel fun

seen, with tongue in venom steep’d, ’Gainst Fortune’s state would treason have pronounced: But if the gods themselves did see her then When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport In mincing with his sword her husband’s limbs, The instant burst of clamour that she made, Unless things mortal move them not at all, Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven, And passion in the gods.”	“Run barefoot up and down, threatening the flames With bisson rheum; a clout upon that head Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe, About her lank and all o’er-teemed loins, A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up; Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep’d, ’Gainst Fortune’s state would treason have pronounced: But if the gods themselves did see her then When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport In mincing with his sword her husband’s limbs, The instant burst of clamour that she made, Unless things mortal move them not at all, Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven, And passion in the gods.”	Anyone who saw this would have cursed their fate as treasonous. But if the gods themselves had seen her when Pyrrhus sadistically butchered her husband, her immediate scream would have moved even them to tears, unless mortal suffering means nothing to them.

turned his colour and has tears in’s eyes.	Look, whether he has not turned his colour and has tears in’s eyes. Pray you, no more.	changed color and has tears in his eyes.

see the players well bestowed?	’Tis well; I’ll have thee speak out the rest soon. Good my lord, will you see the players well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used; for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the time: after your death you were better have a bad epitaph than their ill report while you live.	make sure the actors are comfortable?

were better have a bad epitaph than their ill report while you live.	Good my lord, will you see the players well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used; for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the time: after your death you were better have a bad epitaph than their ill report while you live.	It's better to have a bad obituary than to have them speak badly of you while you're alive.

the abstract and brief chronicles	Good my lord, will you see the players well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used; for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the time: after your death you were better have a bad epitaph than their ill report while you live.	A short summary of what's happening

a bad epitaph	Good my lord, will you see the players well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used; for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the time: after your death you were better have a bad epitaph than their ill report while you live.	a bad reputation after you die

use them according to their desert.	My lord, I will use them according to their desert.	treat them as they deserve.

God’s bodykins	God’s bodykins, man, much better: use every man after his desert, and who should ’scape whipping? Use them after your own honour and dignity: the less they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty.	Good heavens

use every man after his desert, and who should ’scape whipping?	God’s bodykins, man, much better: use every man after his desert, and who should ’scape whipping? Use them after your own honour and dignity: the less they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty.	If you treat everyone as they deserve, who would avoid being punished?

less they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty.	God’s bodykins, man, much better: use every man after his desert, and who should ’scape whipping? Use them after your own honour and dignity: the less they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty. Take them in.	The less they deserve, the more generous you are to help them.

your own honour	God’s bodykins, man, much better: use every man after his desert, and who should ’scape whipping? Use them after your own honour and dignity: the less they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty. Take them in.	your own honor

hear a play to-morrow.	Follow him, friends: we’ll hear a play to-morrow. (Exit Polonius with all the Players but the First.)	We'll see a play tomorrow.

Polonius with all the Players but the First.)	Follow him, friends: we’ll hear a play to-morrow. (Exit Polonius with all the Players but the First.) Dost thou hear me, old friend; can you play the Murder of Gonzago?	Polonius exits with all the actors except the first one.

(Exit Polonius	Follow him, friends: we’ll hear a play to-morrow. (Exit Polonius with all the Players but the First.) Dost thou hear me, old friend; can you play the Murder of Gonzago?	Polonius exits.

me, old friend; can you play the Murder of Gonzago?	(Exit Polonius with all the Players but the First.) Dost thou hear me, old friend; can you play the Murder of Gonzago?	Can you perform the play "The Murder of Gonzago?"

lines, which I would set down and insert in’t, could you not?	We’ll ha’t to-morrow night. You could, for a need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen lines, which I would set down and insert in’t, could you not?	lines that I could write down and put in it, couldn't you?

some dozen or sixteen lines	We’ll ha’t to-morrow night. You could, for a need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen lines, which I would set down and insert in’t, could you not?	about twelve or sixteen lines

drift of circumstance, Get from him why he puts on this confusion, Grating so harshly all his days of quiet With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?	And can you, by no drift of circumstance, Get from him why he puts on this confusion, Grating so harshly all his days of quiet With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?	figure out why he's acting so confused, disrupting his peaceful life with wild and dangerous madness?

so harshly all his days	And can you, by no drift of circumstance, Get from him why he puts on this confusion, Grating so harshly all his days of quiet With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?	so roughly all his life

turbulent and dangerous lunacy	And can you, by no drift of circumstance, Get from him why he puts on this confusion, Grating so harshly all his days of quiet With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?	wild and dangerous madness

confession Of his true state.	Nor do we find him forward to be sounded, But, with a crafty madness, keeps aloof, When we would bring him on to some confession Of his true state.	admitting how he really feels.

a crafty madness	Nor do we find him forward to be sounded, But, with a crafty madness, keeps aloof, When we would bring him on to some confession Of his true state.	a clever act of madness

Niggard of question; but, of our demands, Most free in his reply.	Niggard of question; but, of our demands, Most free in his reply.	He didn't ask many questions, but he answered ours fully.

assay him To any pastime?	Did you assay him To any pastime?	Did you try to get him to do anything fun?

players We o’er-raught on the way: of these we told him; And there did seem in him a kind of joy To hear of it: they are about the court, And, as I think, they have already order This night to play before him.	Madam, it so fell out, that certain players We o’er-raught on the way: of these we told him; And there did seem in him a kind of joy To hear of it: they are about the court, And, as I think, they have already order This night to play before him.	We came across some actors on the road. We told him about them, and he seemed happy to hear it. They're at court, and I think they've already been asked to perform for him tonight.

entreat your majesties To hear and see the matter.	’Tis most true: And he beseech’d me to entreat your majesties To hear and see the matter.	ask your majesties to listen to and observe the situation.

doth much content me To hear him so inclined.	With all my heart; and it doth much content me To hear him so inclined. Good gentlemen, give him a further edge, And drive his purpose on to these delights.	It makes me very happy to hear he feels that way.

drive his purpose on to these delights.	With all my heart; and it doth much content me To hear him so inclined. Good gentlemen, give him a further edge, And drive his purpose on to these delights.	push him towards these pleasures.

(Exeunt Rosencrantz	We shall, my lord. (Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.)	(Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.)

lawful espials	Sweet Gertrude, leave us too; For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither, That he, as ’twere by accident, may here Affront Ophelia: Her father and myself, lawful espials, Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing, unseen, We may of their encounter frankly judge, And gather by him, as he is behaved, If’t be the affliction of his love or no That thus he suffers for.	legal spies

Ophelia: Her father and myself, lawful espials, Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing, unseen, We may of their encounter frankly judge, And gather by him, as he is behaved, If’t be the affliction of his love or no	Sweet Gertrude, leave us too; For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither, That he, as ’twere by accident, may here Affront Ophelia: Her father and myself, lawful espials, Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing, unseen, We may of their encounter frankly judge, And gather by him, as he is behaved, If’t be the affliction of his love or no That thus he suffers for.	Her father and I, acting as legitimate spies, will position ourselves so that we can watch them without being seen, freely evaluate their meeting, and understand from his behavior if he is suffering because of love.

his wonted way	I shall obey you. And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish That your good beauties be the happy cause Of Hamlet’s wildness: so shall I hope your virtues Will bring him to his wonted way again, To both your honours.	his normal self

Hamlet’s wildness	I shall obey you. And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish That your good beauties be the happy cause Of Hamlet’s wildness: so shall I hope your virtues Will bring him to his wonted way again, To both your honours.	Hamlet's madness

bring him to his wonted way again, To both your honours.	I shall obey you. And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish That your good beauties be the happy cause Of Hamlet’s wildness: so shall I hope your virtues Will bring him to his wonted way again, To both your honours.	bring him back to his normal self, for the good of you both.

both your honours	I shall obey you. And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish That your good beauties be the happy cause Of Hamlet’s wildness: so shall I hope your virtues Will bring him to his wonted way again, To both your honours.	the honor of both of you

bestow ourselves.	Ophelia, walk you here. Gracious, so please you, We will bestow ourselves. (To Ophelia.)	We will hide.

show of such an exercise may colour Your loneliness.	(To Ophelia.) Read on this book; That show of such an exercise may colour Your loneliness. We are oft to blame in this— ’Tis too much proved—that with devotion’s visage And pious action we do sugar o’er	pretending to read might hide your being alone.

blame in this— ’Tis too much proved—that with devotion’s visage And pious action we do sugar o’er	Read on this book; That show of such an exercise may colour Your loneliness. We are oft to blame in this— ’Tis too much proved—that with devotion’s visage And pious action we do sugar o’er The devil himself.	blame for this—it's been proven too often—that with a show of devotion and religious behavior we disguise

sugar o’er	Read on this book; That show of such an exercise may colour Your loneliness. We are oft to blame in this— ’Tis too much proved—that with devotion’s visage And pious action we do sugar o’er The devil himself.	cover up

pious action	Read on this book; That show of such an exercise may colour Your loneliness. We are oft to blame in this— ’Tis too much proved—that with devotion’s visage And pious action we do sugar o’er The devil himself.	religious behavior

devotion’s visage	Read on this book; That show of such an exercise may colour Your loneliness. We are oft to blame in this— ’Tis too much proved—that with devotion’s visage And pious action we do sugar o’er The devil himself.	a religious appearance

O, ’tis	(Aside.) O, ’tis too true! How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience!	Oh, it is.

lash that speech doth give my conscience!	O, ’tis too true! How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience! The harlot’s cheek, beautied with plastering art, Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it Than is my deed to my most painted word: O heavy burthen!	That speech stings my conscience!

O heavy burthen	How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience! The harlot’s cheek, beautied with plastering art, Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it Than is my deed to my most painted word: O heavy burthen!	Oh, heavy burden!

The harlot’s cheek	How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience! The harlot’s cheek, beautied with plastering art, Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it Than is my deed to my most painted word: O heavy burthen!	A prostitute's face

thing that helps it Than is my deed to my most painted word: O heavy burthen!	How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience! The harlot’s cheek, beautied with plastering art, Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it Than is my deed to my most painted word: O heavy burthen!	what makes it look good than what I do compared to what I say: Oh, what a heavy burden!

(Exeunt King	I hear him coming: let’s withdraw, my lord. (Exeunt King and Polonius.)	(They exit King)

’tis nobler	(To be, or not to be: that is the question: Whether ’tis nobler in the mind to suffer The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune, Or to take arms against a sea of troubles, And by opposing end them? To die: to sleep; No more; and by a sleep to say we end The heart-ache and the thousand natural shocks That flesh is heir to, ’tis a consummation Devoutly to be wish’d.	it is more honorable

outrageous fortune	(To be, or not to be: that is the question: Whether ’tis nobler in the mind to suffer The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune, Or to take arms against a sea of troubles, And by opposing end them? To die: to sleep; No more; and by a sleep to say we end The heart-ache and the thousand natural shocks That flesh is heir to, ’tis a consummation Devoutly to be wish’d.	terrible bad luck

nobler in the mind to suffer The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune, Or to take arms against a sea of troubles, And by opposing end them?	(To be, or not to be: that is the question: Whether ’tis nobler in the mind to suffer The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune, Or to take arms against a sea of troubles, And by opposing end them? To die: to sleep; No more; and by a sleep to say we end The heart-ache and the thousand natural shocks That flesh is heir to, ’tis a consummation Devoutly to be wish’d.	Is it better to suffer misfortune, or to fight against it and end it?

The heart-ache	(To be, or not to be: that is the question: Whether ’tis nobler in the mind to suffer The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune, Or to take arms against a sea of troubles, And by opposing end them? To die: to sleep; No more; and by a sleep to say we end The heart-ache and the thousand natural shocks That flesh is heir to, ’tis a consummation Devoutly to be wish’d. To die, to sleep; To sleep: perchance to dream: ay, there’s the rub; For in that sleep of death what dreams may come When we have shuffled off this mortal coil, Must give us pause: there’s the respect That makes calamity of so long life;	Heartache

die: to sleep; No more; and by a sleep to say we end The heart-ache and the thousand natural shocks That flesh is heir to, ’tis a consummation Devoutly to be wish’d.	(To be, or not to be: that is the question: Whether ’tis nobler in the mind to suffer The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune, Or to take arms against a sea of troubles, And by opposing end them? To die: to sleep; No more; and by a sleep to say we end The heart-ache and the thousand natural shocks That flesh is heir to, ’tis a consummation Devoutly to be wish’d. To die, to sleep; To sleep: perchance to dream: ay, there’s the rub; For in that sleep of death what dreams may come When we have shuffled off this mortal coil, Must give us pause: there’s the respect That makes calamity of so long life;	To die is to sleep, nothing more; and by sleeping, we could end the heartache and all the suffering we're destined to experience. That's an end worth longing for.

this mortal coil	To die: to sleep; No more; and by a sleep to say we end The heart-ache and the thousand natural shocks That flesh is heir to, ’tis a consummation Devoutly to be wish’d. To die, to sleep; To sleep: perchance to dream: ay, there’s the rub; For in that sleep of death what dreams may come When we have shuffled off this mortal coil, Must give us pause: there’s the respect That makes calamity of so long life; For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, The oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s contumely, The pangs of despised love, the law’s delay, The insolence of office and the spurns That patient merit of the unworthy takes, When he himself might his quietus make With a bare bodkin?	the troubles of life

come When we have shuffled off this mortal coil, Must give us pause: there’s the respect That makes calamity of so long life;	To die: to sleep; No more; and by a sleep to say we end The heart-ache and the thousand natural shocks That flesh is heir to, ’tis a consummation Devoutly to be wish’d. To die, to sleep; To sleep: perchance to dream: ay, there’s the rub; For in that sleep of death what dreams may come When we have shuffled off this mortal coil, Must give us pause: there’s the respect That makes calamity of so long life; For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, The oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s contumely, The pangs of despised love, the law’s delay, The insolence of office and the spurns That patient merit of the unworthy takes, When he himself might his quietus make With a bare bodkin?	what dreams may come after we escape this life, that's what makes us hesitate. That's why we see living so long as a misfortune.

the proud man’s contumely	To die, to sleep; To sleep: perchance to dream: ay, there’s the rub; For in that sleep of death what dreams may come When we have shuffled off this mortal coil, Must give us pause: there’s the respect That makes calamity of so long life; For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, The oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s contumely, The pangs of despised love, the law’s delay, The insolence of office and the spurns That patient merit of the unworthy takes, When he himself might his quietus make With a bare bodkin? who would fardels bear, To grunt and sweat under a weary life, But that the dread of something after death, The undiscover’d country from whose bourn No traveller returns, puzzles the will And makes us rather bear those ills we have Than fly to others that we know not of?	the insults of arrogant people

despised love	To die, to sleep; To sleep: perchance to dream: ay, there’s the rub; For in that sleep of death what dreams may come When we have shuffled off this mortal coil, Must give us pause: there’s the respect That makes calamity of so long life; For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, The oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s contumely, The pangs of despised love, the law’s delay, The insolence of office and the spurns That patient merit of the unworthy takes, When he himself might his quietus make With a bare bodkin? who would fardels bear, To grunt and sweat under a weary life, But that the dread of something after death, The undiscover’d country from whose bourn No traveller returns, puzzles the will And makes us rather bear those ills we have Than fly to others that we know not of?	unrequited love

the unworthy takes	To die, to sleep; To sleep: perchance to dream: ay, there’s the rub; For in that sleep of death what dreams may come When we have shuffled off this mortal coil, Must give us pause: there’s the respect That makes calamity of so long life; For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, The oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s contumely, The pangs of despised love, the law’s delay, The insolence of office and the spurns That patient merit of the unworthy takes, When he himself might his quietus make With a bare bodkin? who would fardels bear, To grunt and sweat under a weary life, But that the dread of something after death, The undiscover’d country from whose bourn No traveller returns, puzzles the will And makes us rather bear those ills we have Than fly to others that we know not of?	the insults that patient good people suffer from those who don't deserve it

a bare bodkin	To die, to sleep; To sleep: perchance to dream: ay, there’s the rub; For in that sleep of death what dreams may come When we have shuffled off this mortal coil, Must give us pause: there’s the respect That makes calamity of so long life; For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, The oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s contumely, The pangs of despised love, the law’s delay, The insolence of office and the spurns That patient merit of the unworthy takes, When he himself might his quietus make With a bare bodkin? who would fardels bear, To grunt and sweat under a weary life, But that the dread of something after death, The undiscover’d country from whose bourn No traveller returns, puzzles the will And makes us rather bear those ills we have Than fly to others that we know not of?	a simple dagger

make With a bare bodkin?	To die, to sleep; To sleep: perchance to dream: ay, there’s the rub; For in that sleep of death what dreams may come When we have shuffled off this mortal coil, Must give us pause: there’s the respect That makes calamity of so long life; For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, The oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s contumely, The pangs of despised love, the law’s delay, The insolence of office and the spurns That patient merit of the unworthy takes, When he himself might his quietus make With a bare bodkin? who would fardels bear, To grunt and sweat under a weary life, But that the dread of something after death, The undiscover’d country from whose bourn No traveller returns, puzzles the will And makes us rather bear those ills we have Than fly to others that we know not of?	commit suicide with a simple dagger?

the law’s delay	To die, to sleep; To sleep: perchance to dream: ay, there’s the rub; For in that sleep of death what dreams may come When we have shuffled off this mortal coil, Must give us pause: there’s the respect That makes calamity of so long life; For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, The oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s contumely, The pangs of despised love, the law’s delay, The insolence of office and the spurns That patient merit of the unworthy takes, When he himself might his quietus make With a bare bodkin? who would fardels bear, To grunt and sweat under a weary life, But that the dread of something after death, The undiscover’d country from whose bourn No traveller returns, puzzles the will And makes us rather bear those ills we have Than fly to others that we know not of?	the slowness of the legal system

The undiscover’d country	For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, The oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s contumely, The pangs of despised love, the law’s delay, The insolence of office and the spurns That patient merit of the unworthy takes, When he himself might his quietus make With a bare bodkin? who would fardels bear, To grunt and sweat under a weary life, But that the dread of something after death, The undiscover’d country from whose bourn No traveller returns, puzzles the will And makes us rather bear those ills we have Than fly to others that we know not of? Thus conscience does make cowards of us all; And thus the native hue of resolution Is sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought, And enterprises of great pitch and moment With this regard their currents turn awry, And lose the name of action.—Soft you now!	The unknown afterlife

dread of something after death, The undiscover’d country from whose bourn No traveller returns, puzzles the will And makes us rather bear those ills we have Than fly to others that we know not of?	For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, The oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s contumely, The pangs of despised love, the law’s delay, The insolence of office and the spurns That patient merit of the unworthy takes, When he himself might his quietus make With a bare bodkin? who would fardels bear, To grunt and sweat under a weary life, But that the dread of something after death, The undiscover’d country from whose bourn No traveller returns, puzzles the will And makes us rather bear those ills we have Than fly to others that we know not of? Thus conscience does make cowards of us all; And thus the native hue of resolution Is sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought, And enterprises of great pitch and moment With this regard their currents turn awry, And lose the name of action.—Soft you now!	the fear of what happens after death, that unknown place no one comes back from, confuses us and makes us rather suffer the problems we have than face new ones we don't know about?

a weary life	For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, The oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s contumely, The pangs of despised love, the law’s delay, The insolence of office and the spurns That patient merit of the unworthy takes, When he himself might his quietus make With a bare bodkin? who would fardels bear, To grunt and sweat under a weary life, But that the dread of something after death, The undiscover’d country from whose bourn No traveller returns, puzzles the will And makes us rather bear those ills we have Than fly to others that we know not of? Thus conscience does make cowards of us all; And thus the native hue of resolution Is sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought, And enterprises of great pitch and moment With this regard their currents turn awry, And lose the name of action.—Soft you now!	a difficult life

the native hue	who would fardels bear, To grunt and sweat under a weary life, But that the dread of something after death, The undiscover’d country from whose bourn No traveller returns, puzzles the will And makes us rather bear those ills we have Than fly to others that we know not of? Thus conscience does make cowards of us all; And thus the native hue of resolution Is sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought, And enterprises of great pitch and moment With this regard their currents turn awry, And lose the name of action.—Soft you now! The fair Ophelia!	natural color

Is sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought, And enterprises of great pitch and moment With this regard their currents turn awry, And lose the name of action.—Soft you now!	who would fardels bear, To grunt and sweat under a weary life, But that the dread of something after death, The undiscover’d country from whose bourn No traveller returns, puzzles the will And makes us rather bear those ills we have Than fly to others that we know not of? Thus conscience does make cowards of us all; And thus the native hue of resolution Is sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought, And enterprises of great pitch and moment With this regard their currents turn awry, And lose the name of action.—Soft you now! The fair Ophelia!	Is weakened by too much thinking, and important plans and actions get misdirected and never happen. But look!

The fair Ophelia	Thus conscience does make cowards of us all; And thus the native hue of resolution Is sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought, And enterprises of great pitch and moment With this regard their currents turn awry, And lose the name of action.—Soft you now! The fair Ophelia! Nymph, in thy orisons Be all my sins remember’d.)	Beautiful Ophelia.

Be all my sins remember’d.)	The fair Ophelia! Nymph, in thy orisons Be all my sins remember’d.)	Remember all my sins.

honour for this many a day?	Good my lord, How does your honour for this many a day?	How have you been these past days?

remembrances of yours, That I have longed long to re-deliver; I pray you, now receive them.	My lord, I have remembrances of yours, That I have longed long to re-deliver; I pray you, now receive them.	I have some things of yours that I've been wanting to return for a while; please take them now.

for to the noble mind Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.	My honour’d lord, you know right well you did; And, with them, words of so sweet breath composed As made the things more rich: their perfume lost, Take these again; for to the noble mind Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind. There, my lord.	To a noble person, expensive gifts become worthless when the giver is unkind.

admit no discourse to your beauty.	That if you be honest and fair, your honesty should admit no discourse to your beauty.	should not be overshadowed by your beauty.

commerce than with honesty?	Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than with honesty?	Is there a better partnership than beauty and honesty?

is to a bawd than the force of honesty can translate beauty into his likeness: this was sometime a paradox, but now the time gives it proof.	Ay, truly; for the power of beauty will sooner transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than the force of honesty can translate beauty into his likeness: this was sometime a paradox, but now the time gives it proof. I did love you once.	than honesty can make beauty honest. This used to seem impossible, but now it's clearly true.

inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of it: I loved you not.	You should not have believed me; for virtue cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of it: I loved you not.	graft virtue onto our old nature so that we won't still taste of it: I didn't love you.

Get thee to a nunnery: why wouldst thou be a breeder of sinners?	Get thee to a nunnery: why wouldst thou be a breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest; but yet I could accuse me of such things that it were better my mother had not borne me: I am very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offences at my beck than I have thoughts to put them in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act them in.	Go to a convent: why would you bring more sinners into the world?

more offences	Get thee to a nunnery: why wouldst thou be a breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest; but yet I could accuse me of such things that it were better my mother had not borne me: I am very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offences at my beck than I have thoughts to put them in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act them in. What should such fellows as I do crawling between earth and heaven?	more sins

imagination to give them shape, or time to act them in.	Get thee to a nunnery: why wouldst thou be a breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest; but yet I could accuse me of such things that it were better my mother had not borne me: I am very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offences at my beck than I have thoughts to put them in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act them in. What should such fellows as I do crawling between earth and heaven?	or the time to carry them out.

crawling between earth and heaven?	I am myself indifferent honest; but yet I could accuse me of such things that it were better my mother had not borne me: I am very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offences at my beck than I have thoughts to put them in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act them in. What should such fellows as I do crawling between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves, all; believe none of us.	living between life and death?

arrant knaves	What should such fellows as I do crawling between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves, all; believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery.	absolute scoundrels

Go thy ways to a nunnery.	We are arrant knaves, all; believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery. Where’s your father?	Go to a convent.

shut upon him, that he may play the fool nowhere but in’s own house.	Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the fool nowhere but in’s own house. Farewell.	Lock him in, so he can only be a fool at home.

thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape calumny.	If thou dost marry, I’ll give thee this plague for thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get thee to a nunnery, go: farewell.	Even if you're as chaste as ice and as pure as snow, you won't escape being slandered.

Get thee to a nunnery, go: farewell.	If thou dost marry, I’ll give thee this plague for thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get thee to a nunnery, go: farewell. Or, if thou wilt needs marry, marry a fool; for wise men know well enough what monsters you make of them.	Go to a convent, goodbye.

O heavenly powers	O heavenly powers, restore him!	O heavenly powers

nick-name God’s creatures	I have heard of your paintings too, well enough; God has given you one face, and you make yourselves another: you jig, you amble, and you lisp, and nick-name God’s creatures, and make your wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I’ll no more on’t; it hath made me mad.	give insulting names to what God created

heard of your paintings too, well enough; God has given you one face, and you make yourselves another: you jig, you amble, and you lisp, and nick-name God’s creatures, and make your wantonness your ignorance.	I have heard of your paintings too, well enough; God has given you one face, and you make yourselves another: you jig, you amble, and you lisp, and nick-name God’s creatures, and make your wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I’ll no more on’t; it hath made me mad.	I know all about your makeup; God gave you one face, but you create another. You prance around, walk affectedly, speak with a lisp, give nicknames to God's creatures, and use your foolishness as an excuse for your ignorance.

Go to, I’ll no more on’t; it hath made me mad.	I have heard of your paintings too, well enough; God has given you one face, and you make yourselves another: you jig, you amble, and you lisp, and nick-name God’s creatures, and make your wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I’ll no more on’t; it hath made me mad. I say, we will have no more marriages: those that are married already, all but one, shall live; the rest shall keep as they are.	Enough, I'm done with it; it's driven me crazy.

observed of all observers, quite, quite down!	O, what a noble mind is here o’erthrown! The courtier’s, soldier’s, scholar’s, eye, tongue, sword; The expectancy and rose of the fair state, The glass of fashion and the mould of form, The observed of all observers, quite, quite down! And I, of ladies most deject and wretched, That suck’d the honey of his music vows, Now see that noble and most sovereign reason, Like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh; That unmatch’d form and feature of blown youth Blasted with ecstasy: O, woe is me, To have seen what I have seen, see what I see!	the center of everyone's attention, completely ruined!

most deject	The courtier’s, soldier’s, scholar’s, eye, tongue, sword; The expectancy and rose of the fair state, The glass of fashion and the mould of form, The observed of all observers, quite, quite down! And I, of ladies most deject and wretched, That suck’d the honey of his music vows, Now see that noble and most sovereign reason, Like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh; That unmatch’d form and feature of blown youth Blasted with ecstasy: O, woe is me, To have seen what I have seen, see what I see!	very sad

honey of his music vows, Now see that noble and most sovereign reason, Like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh; That unmatch’d form and feature of blown youth Blasted with ecstasy: O, woe is me, To have seen what I have seen, see what I see!	The courtier’s, soldier’s, scholar’s, eye, tongue, sword; The expectancy and rose of the fair state, The glass of fashion and the mould of form, The observed of all observers, quite, quite down! And I, of ladies most deject and wretched, That suck’d the honey of his music vows, Now see that noble and most sovereign reason, Like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh; That unmatch’d form and feature of blown youth Blasted with ecstasy: O, woe is me, To have seen what I have seen, see what I see!	the sweet promises he made, now I see his brilliant mind, like beautiful bells ringing discordantly; his perfect youthful appearance ruined by madness. Oh, how sad I am, to have witnessed his former glory and now see his decline!

that noble and most sovereign reason	The courtier’s, soldier’s, scholar’s, eye, tongue, sword; The expectancy and rose of the fair state, The glass of fashion and the mould of form, The observed of all observers, quite, quite down! And I, of ladies most deject and wretched, That suck’d the honey of his music vows, Now see that noble and most sovereign reason, Like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh; That unmatch’d form and feature of blown youth Blasted with ecstasy: O, woe is me, To have seen what I have seen, see what I see!	that brilliant and powerful mind

his music vows	The courtier’s, soldier’s, scholar’s, eye, tongue, sword; The expectancy and rose of the fair state, The glass of fashion and the mould of form, The observed of all observers, quite, quite down! And I, of ladies most deject and wretched, That suck’d the honey of his music vows, Now see that noble and most sovereign reason, Like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh; That unmatch’d form and feature of blown youth Blasted with ecstasy: O, woe is me, To have seen what I have seen, see what I see!	the promises he made with such beautiful words

That unmatch’d form	The courtier’s, soldier’s, scholar’s, eye, tongue, sword; The expectancy and rose of the fair state, The glass of fashion and the mould of form, The observed of all observers, quite, quite down! And I, of ladies most deject and wretched, That suck’d the honey of his music vows, Now see that noble and most sovereign reason, Like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh; That unmatch’d form and feature of blown youth Blasted with ecstasy: O, woe is me, To have seen what I have seen, see what I see!	That unmatched beauty

Haply the seas	his affections do not that way tend; Nor what he spake, though it lack’d form a little, Was not like madness. There’s something in his soul, O’er which his melancholy sits on brood; And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose Will be some danger: which for to prevent, I have in quick determination Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England, For the demand of our neglected tribute: Haply the seas and countries different With variable objects shall expel This something-settled matter in his heart, Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus From fashion of himself. What think you on’t?	Maybe the seas

expel This something-settled matter in his heart, Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus From fashion of himself.	his affections do not that way tend; Nor what he spake, though it lack’d form a little, Was not like madness. There’s something in his soul, O’er which his melancholy sits on brood; And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose Will be some danger: which for to prevent, I have in quick determination Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England, For the demand of our neglected tribute: Haply the seas and countries different With variable objects shall expel This something-settled matter in his heart, Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus From fashion of himself. What think you on’t?	get rid of this fixed idea in his head that's driving him crazy and making him unlike himself.

our neglected tribute	his affections do not that way tend; Nor what he spake, though it lack’d form a little, Was not like madness. There’s something in his soul, O’er which his melancholy sits on brood; And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose Will be some danger: which for to prevent, I have in quick determination Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England, For the demand of our neglected tribute: Haply the seas and countries different With variable objects shall expel This something-settled matter in his heart, Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus From fashion of himself. What think you on’t?	the tribute we haven't collected

believe The origin and commencement of his grief Sprung from neglected love.	It shall do well: but yet do I believe The origin and commencement of his grief Sprung from neglected love. How now, Ophelia!	believe the reason he's upset started because he feels unloved.

neglected love	It shall do well: but yet do I believe The origin and commencement of his grief Sprung from neglected love. How now, Ophelia!	unrequited love

his grief Sprung	It shall do well: but yet do I believe The origin and commencement of his grief Sprung from neglected love. How now, Ophelia!	his sadness began

How now, Ophelia	It shall do well: but yet do I believe The origin and commencement of his grief Sprung from neglected love. How now, Ophelia! You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said; We heard it all.	What's wrong, Ophelia?

hold it fit, after the play Let his queen mother all alone entreat him To show his grief: let her be round with him; And I’ll be placed, so please you, in the ear Of all their conference.	You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said; We heard it all. My lord, do as you please; But, if you hold it fit, after the play Let his queen mother all alone entreat him To show his grief: let her be round with him; And I’ll be placed, so please you, in the ear Of all their conference. If she find him not, To England send him, or confine him where Your wisdom best shall think.	think it's a good idea for his mother to talk to him alone after the play, to urge him to reveal his sorrow. Let her be direct with him, and I'll hide nearby to listen to their conversation.

find him not, To England send him, or confine him where Your wisdom best shall think.	My lord, do as you please; But, if you hold it fit, after the play Let his queen mother all alone entreat him To show his grief: let her be round with him; And I’ll be placed, so please you, in the ear Of all their conference. If she find him not, To England send him, or confine him where Your wisdom best shall think.	If she can't figure him out, send him to England, or lock him up wherever you think is best.

Madness in great ones must not unwatch’d go.	It shall be so: Madness in great ones must not unwatch’d go. (Exeunt.)	The madness of important people must not be ignored.

the town-crier	Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to you, trippingly on the tongue: but if you mouth it, as many of your players do, I had as lief the town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say, the whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness.	the town crier

many of your players do, I had as lief the town-crier spoke my lines.	Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to you, trippingly on the tongue: but if you mouth it, as many of your players do, I had as lief the town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say, the whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness.	I'd rather have the town crier say my lines, like many of your actors do.

the very torrent	Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to you, trippingly on the tongue: but if you mouth it, as many of your players do, I had as lief the town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say, the whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumbshows and noise: I would have such a fellow whipped for o’erdoing Termagant; it out-herods Herod: pray you, avoid it.	the torrent

whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness.	Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to you, trippingly on the tongue: but if you mouth it, as many of your players do, I had as lief the town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say, the whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumbshows and noise: I would have such a fellow whipped for o’erdoing Termagant; it out-herods Herod: pray you, avoid it.	Even in the most passionate moments, you need to find a balance that makes it flow smoothly.

capable of nothing but inexplicable dumbshows and noise: I would have such a fellow whipped for o’erdoing Termagant; it out-herods Herod: pray you, avoid it.	Nor do not saw the air too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say, the whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumbshows and noise: I would have such a fellow whipped for o’erdoing Termagant; it out-herods Herod: pray you, avoid it.	who understand only confusing silent performances and loud noises. I'd have an actor like that whipped for overplaying the role of Termagant; it's worse than Herod: please, avoid that.

very rags	Nor do not saw the air too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say, the whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumbshows and noise: I would have such a fellow whipped for o’erdoing Termagant; it out-herods Herod: pray you, avoid it.	very shreds

inexplicable dumbshows	Nor do not saw the air too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say, the whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumbshows and noise: I would have such a fellow whipped for o’erdoing Termagant; it out-herods Herod: pray you, avoid it.	pantomimes that are impossible to understand

out-herods Herod	Nor do not saw the air too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say, the whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumbshows and noise: I would have such a fellow whipped for o’erdoing Termagant; it out-herods Herod: pray you, avoid it.	goes way over the top.

o’erdoing Termagant	Nor do not saw the air too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say, the whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumbshows and noise: I would have such a fellow whipped for o’erdoing Termagant; it out-herods Herod: pray you, avoid it.	overacting the role of Termagant

a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear	Nor do not saw the air too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say, the whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumbshows and noise: I would have such a fellow whipped for o’erdoing Termagant; it out-herods Herod: pray you, avoid it.	a boisterous actor in a wig wildly overacts

this special observance	Be not too tame neither, but let your own discretion be your tutor: suit the action to the word, the word to the action; with this special observance, that you o’erstep not the modesty of nature: for any thing so overdone is from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at the first and now, was and is, to hold, as ’twere, the mirror up to nature; to show virtue her own feature, scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time his form and pressure. Now this overdone, or come tardy off, though it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve; the censure of the which one must in your allowance o’erweigh a whole theatre of others.	pay close attention to this

is from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at the first and now, was and is, to hold, as ’twere, the mirror up to nature; to show virtue her own feature, scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time his form and pressure.	Be not too tame neither, but let your own discretion be your tutor: suit the action to the word, the word to the action; with this special observance, that you o’erstep not the modesty of nature: for any thing so overdone is from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at the first and now, was and is, to hold, as ’twere, the mirror up to nature; to show virtue her own feature, scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time his form and pressure. Now this overdone, or come tardy off, though it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve; the censure of the which one must in your allowance o’erweigh a whole theatre of others.	defeats the purpose of acting. Acting's goal, then and now, is to reflect reality, to show virtue its true form, vice its true reflection, and to capture the essence of the time period.

come tardy off, though it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve; the censure of the which one must in your allowance o’erweigh a whole theatre of others.	Be not too tame neither, but let your own discretion be your tutor: suit the action to the word, the word to the action; with this special observance, that you o’erstep not the modesty of nature: for any thing so overdone is from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at the first and now, was and is, to hold, as ’twere, the mirror up to nature; to show virtue her own feature, scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time his form and pressure. Now this overdone, or come tardy off, though it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve; the censure of the which one must in your allowance o’erweigh a whole theatre of others. O, there be players that I have seen play, and heard others praise, and that highly, not to speak it profanely, that, neither having the accent of Christians nor the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and bellowed that I have thought some of nature’s journeymen had made men and not made them well, they imitated humanity so abominably.	performed poorly, though it makes the inexperienced laugh, cannot help but make the discerning sad; the judgment of one of these people must outweigh a whole theater of others in your estimation.

Now this overdone	Be not too tame neither, but let your own discretion be your tutor: suit the action to the word, the word to the action; with this special observance, that you o’erstep not the modesty of nature: for any thing so overdone is from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at the first and now, was and is, to hold, as ’twere, the mirror up to nature; to show virtue her own feature, scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time his form and pressure. Now this overdone, or come tardy off, though it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve; the censure of the which one must in your allowance o’erweigh a whole theatre of others. O, there be players that I have seen play, and heard others praise, and that highly, not to speak it profanely, that, neither having the accent of Christians nor the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and bellowed that I have thought some of nature’s journeymen had made men and not made them well, they imitated humanity so abominably.	Now, if this is overdone

the unskilful laugh	Be not too tame neither, but let your own discretion be your tutor: suit the action to the word, the word to the action; with this special observance, that you o’erstep not the modesty of nature: for any thing so overdone is from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at the first and now, was and is, to hold, as ’twere, the mirror up to nature; to show virtue her own feature, scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time his form and pressure. Now this overdone, or come tardy off, though it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve; the censure of the which one must in your allowance o’erweigh a whole theatre of others. O, there be players that I have seen play, and heard others praise, and that highly, not to speak it profanely, that, neither having the accent of Christians nor the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and bellowed that I have thought some of nature’s journeymen had made men and not made them well, they imitated humanity so abominably.	the inexperienced laugh

nature’s journeymen	Now this overdone, or come tardy off, though it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve; the censure of the which one must in your allowance o’erweigh a whole theatre of others. O, there be players that I have seen play, and heard others praise, and that highly, not to speak it profanely, that, neither having the accent of Christians nor the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and bellowed that I have thought some of nature’s journeymen had made men and not made them well, they imitated humanity so abominably.	inexperienced workers of nature

players that I have seen play, and heard others praise, and that highly, not to speak it profanely, that, neither having the accent of Christians nor the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and bellowed that I have thought some of nature’s journeymen had made men and not made them well, they imitated humanity so abominably.	Now this overdone, or come tardy off, though it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve; the censure of the which one must in your allowance o’erweigh a whole theatre of others. O, there be players that I have seen play, and heard others praise, and that highly, not to speak it profanely, that, neither having the accent of Christians nor the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and bellowed that I have thought some of nature’s journeymen had made men and not made them well, they imitated humanity so abominably.	I've seen actors perform, and heard them praised excessively, (and I don't mean to be disrespectful) who, without speaking or moving like any human being, Christian or otherwise, strutted and shouted so much that I thought they were badly made men, churned out by nature's apprentices; their imitation of humanity was awful.

reformed that indifferently with us, sir.	I hope we have reformed that indifferently with us, sir.	I hope we've fixed that problem you weren't happy with, sir.

barren spectators	O, reform it altogether. And let those that play your clowns speak no more than is set down for them; for there be of them that will themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators to laugh too; though, in the mean time, some necessary question of the play be then to be considered: that’s villainous, and shows a most pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it. Go, make you ready.	unintelligent audience

set down for them; for there be of them that will themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators to laugh too; though, in the mean time, some necessary question of the play be then to be considered: that’s villainous, and shows a most pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it.	O, reform it altogether. And let those that play your clowns speak no more than is set down for them; for there be of them that will themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators to laugh too; though, in the mean time, some necessary question of the play be then to be considered: that’s villainous, and shows a most pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it. Go, make you ready.	written for them. Some of them will laugh at their own jokes to make the dumb audience laugh too, even if it interrupts an important part of the play. That's terrible and shows the clown is desperately trying to be liked.

a most pitiful ambition	O, reform it altogether. And let those that play your clowns speak no more than is set down for them; for there be of them that will themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators to laugh too; though, in the mean time, some necessary question of the play be then to be considered: that’s villainous, and shows a most pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it. Go, make you ready.	a truly pathetic desire

(Exeunt Players	Go, make you ready. (Exeunt Players.)	The actors exit.

(Exit Polonius	Bid the players make haste. (Exit Polonius.) Will you two help to hasten them?	)

(Exeunt Rosencrantz	We will, my lord. (Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.)	(Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.)

art e’en	Horatio, thou art e’en as just a man As e’er my conversation coped withal.	are even

thou art e’en as just a man As e’er my conversation coped withal.	Horatio, thou art e’en as just a man As e’er my conversation coped withal.	you are the most fair-minded man I have ever spoken with.

hope from thee That no revenue hast but thy good spirits, To feed and clothe thee?	Nay, do not think I flatter; For what advancement may I hope from thee That no revenue hast but thy good spirits, To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be flatter’d?	expect from you, since you have no money, only your positive attitude, to provide food and clothing?

the candied tongue	Why should the poor be flatter’d? No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp, And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?	flattering speech

the pregnant hinges	Why should the poor be flatter’d? No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp, And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?	knees that bend easily and often

knee Where thrift may follow fawning.	Why should the poor be flatter’d? No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp, And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?	knees so they can profit from flattery.

absurd pomp	Why should the poor be flatter’d? No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp, And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?	ridiculous extravagance

fortune’s buffets	Dost thou hear? Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice And could of men distinguish, her election Hath seal’d thee for herself; for thou hast been As one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing, A man that fortune’s buffets and rewards Hast ta’en with equal thanks: and blest are those Whose blood and judgment are so well commingled, That they are not a pipe for fortune’s finger To sound what stop she please. Give me that man That is not passion’s slave, and I will wear him In my heart’s core, ay, in my heart of heart, As I do thee.—Something too much of this.—	bad luck

hast been As one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing, A man that fortune’s buffets and rewards Hast ta’en with equal thanks: and blest are those Whose blood and judgment are so well commingled, That they are not a pipe for fortune’s finger To sound what stop she please.	Dost thou hear? Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice And could of men distinguish, her election Hath seal’d thee for herself; for thou hast been As one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing, A man that fortune’s buffets and rewards Hast ta’en with equal thanks: and blest are those Whose blood and judgment are so well commingled, That they are not a pipe for fortune’s finger To sound what stop she please. Give me that man That is not passion’s slave, and I will wear him In my heart’s core, ay, in my heart of heart, As I do thee.—Something too much of this.—	You've been like someone who endures everything yet suffers nothing, a man who accepts both good and bad luck with equal gratitude. And blessed are those who have such a balance of passion and reason that they aren't easily controlled by fortune.

fortune’s finger	Dost thou hear? Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice And could of men distinguish, her election Hath seal’d thee for herself; for thou hast been As one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing, A man that fortune’s buffets and rewards Hast ta’en with equal thanks: and blest are those Whose blood and judgment are so well commingled, That they are not a pipe for fortune’s finger To sound what stop she please. Give me that man That is not passion’s slave, and I will wear him In my heart’s core, ay, in my heart of heart, As I do thee.—Something too much of this.—	fate's control

wear him In my heart’s core, ay, in my heart of heart, As I do thee.—Something too much of this.—	Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice And could of men distinguish, her election Hath seal’d thee for herself; for thou hast been As one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing, A man that fortune’s buffets and rewards Hast ta’en with equal thanks: and blest are those Whose blood and judgment are so well commingled, That they are not a pipe for fortune’s finger To sound what stop she please. Give me that man That is not passion’s slave, and I will wear him In my heart’s core, ay, in my heart of heart, As I do thee.—Something too much of this.— There is a play to-night before the king; One scene of it comes near the circumstance Which I have told thee of my father’s death: I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot, Even with the very comment of thy soul Observe mine uncle: if his occulted guilt Do not itself unkennel in one speech, It is a damned ghost that we have seen, And my imaginations are as foul As Vulcan’s stithy.	hold him dearly in my heart, just as I do you.—But enough about that.

passion’s slave	Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice And could of men distinguish, her election Hath seal’d thee for herself; for thou hast been As one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing, A man that fortune’s buffets and rewards Hast ta’en with equal thanks: and blest are those Whose blood and judgment are so well commingled, That they are not a pipe for fortune’s finger To sound what stop she please. Give me that man That is not passion’s slave, and I will wear him In my heart’s core, ay, in my heart of heart, As I do thee.—Something too much of this.— There is a play to-night before the king; One scene of it comes near the circumstance Which I have told thee of my father’s death: I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot, Even with the very comment of thy soul Observe mine uncle: if his occulted guilt Do not itself unkennel in one speech, It is a damned ghost that we have seen, And my imaginations are as foul As Vulcan’s stithy.	controlled by emotions

my heart’s core	Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice And could of men distinguish, her election Hath seal’d thee for herself; for thou hast been As one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing, A man that fortune’s buffets and rewards Hast ta’en with equal thanks: and blest are those Whose blood and judgment are so well commingled, That they are not a pipe for fortune’s finger To sound what stop she please. Give me that man That is not passion’s slave, and I will wear him In my heart’s core, ay, in my heart of heart, As I do thee.—Something too much of this.— There is a play to-night before the king; One scene of it comes near the circumstance Which I have told thee of my father’s death: I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot, Even with the very comment of thy soul Observe mine uncle: if his occulted guilt Do not itself unkennel in one speech, It is a damned ghost that we have seen, And my imaginations are as foul As Vulcan’s stithy.	deepest part of my heart

his occulted guilt	Give me that man That is not passion’s slave, and I will wear him In my heart’s core, ay, in my heart of heart, As I do thee.—Something too much of this.— There is a play to-night before the king; One scene of it comes near the circumstance Which I have told thee of my father’s death: I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot, Even with the very comment of thy soul Observe mine uncle: if his occulted guilt Do not itself unkennel in one speech, It is a damned ghost that we have seen, And my imaginations are as foul As Vulcan’s stithy. Give him heedful note; For I mine eyes will rivet to his face, And after we will both our judgments join In censure of his seeming.	his hidden guilt

my father’s death	Give me that man That is not passion’s slave, and I will wear him In my heart’s core, ay, in my heart of heart, As I do thee.—Something too much of this.— There is a play to-night before the king; One scene of it comes near the circumstance Which I have told thee of my father’s death: I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot, Even with the very comment of thy soul Observe mine uncle: if his occulted guilt Do not itself unkennel in one speech, It is a damned ghost that we have seen, And my imaginations are as foul As Vulcan’s stithy. Give him heedful note; For I mine eyes will rivet to his face, And after we will both our judgments join In censure of his seeming.	the way my father died

a damned ghost	Give me that man That is not passion’s slave, and I will wear him In my heart’s core, ay, in my heart of heart, As I do thee.—Something too much of this.— There is a play to-night before the king; One scene of it comes near the circumstance Which I have told thee of my father’s death: I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot, Even with the very comment of thy soul Observe mine uncle: if his occulted guilt Do not itself unkennel in one speech, It is a damned ghost that we have seen, And my imaginations are as foul As Vulcan’s stithy. Give him heedful note; For I mine eyes will rivet to his face, And after we will both our judgments join In censure of his seeming.	a ghost from hell

thou seest that act afoot, Even with the very comment of thy soul Observe mine uncle: if his occulted guilt Do not itself unkennel in one speech, It is a damned ghost that we have seen, And my imaginations are as foul As Vulcan’s stithy.	Give me that man That is not passion’s slave, and I will wear him In my heart’s core, ay, in my heart of heart, As I do thee.—Something too much of this.— There is a play to-night before the king; One scene of it comes near the circumstance Which I have told thee of my father’s death: I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot, Even with the very comment of thy soul Observe mine uncle: if his occulted guilt Do not itself unkennel in one speech, It is a damned ghost that we have seen, And my imaginations are as foul As Vulcan’s stithy. Give him heedful note; For I mine eyes will rivet to his face, And after we will both our judgments join In censure of his seeming.	when you see that scene being performed, watch my uncle with all your attention and understanding. If his hidden guilt doesn't reveal itself in a single word, then the ghost we saw was evil, and my suspicions are as dirty as Vulcan's forge.

heedful note	There is a play to-night before the king; One scene of it comes near the circumstance Which I have told thee of my father’s death: I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot, Even with the very comment of thy soul Observe mine uncle: if his occulted guilt Do not itself unkennel in one speech, It is a damned ghost that we have seen, And my imaginations are as foul As Vulcan’s stithy. Give him heedful note; For I mine eyes will rivet to his face, And after we will both our judgments join In censure of his seeming.	careful attention

censure of his seeming.	There is a play to-night before the king; One scene of it comes near the circumstance Which I have told thee of my father’s death: I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot, Even with the very comment of thy soul Observe mine uncle: if his occulted guilt Do not itself unkennel in one speech, It is a damned ghost that we have seen, And my imaginations are as foul As Vulcan’s stithy. Give him heedful note; For I mine eyes will rivet to his face, And after we will both our judgments join In censure of his seeming.	judge how he appears to react.

’scape detecting	Well, my lord: If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing, And ’scape detecting, I will pay the theft.	escape detection

steal aught the whilst this play is playing, And ’scape detecting, I will pay the theft.	Well, my lord: If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing, And ’scape detecting, I will pay the theft.	steal anything while this play is happening, and avoid getting caught, I will pay for what was stolen.

coming to the play; I must be idle: Get you a place.	They are coming to the play; I must be idle: Get you a place.	They're coming to the play, so I need to relax. Go find a seat.

cousin Hamlet?	How fares our cousin Hamlet?	Cousin Hamlet?

faith; of the chameleon’s dish: I eat the air, promise-crammed: you cannot feed capons so.	Excellent, i’ faith; of the chameleon’s dish: I eat the air, promise-crammed: you cannot feed capons so.	Excellent, truly! It's like a chameleon's meal: I'm eating nothing but air, stuffed with promises. You can't even fatten up chickens with so little.

the chameleon’s dish	Excellent, i’ faith; of the chameleon’s dish: I eat the air, promise-crammed: you cannot feed capons so.	Chameleon's food.

answer, Hamlet; these words are not mine.	I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet; these words are not mine.	answer, Hamlet; these words are not mine.

i’ the Capitol; Brutus killed me.	I did enact Julius Caesar: I was killed i’ the Capitol; Brutus killed me.	in the Capitol; Brutus killed me.

part of him to kill so capital a calf there.	It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf there. Be the players ready?	It was awful of him to kill such a fine calf there.

a brute part	It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf there. Be the players ready?	a cruel thing

stay upon your patience.	Ay, my lord; they stay upon your patience.	are waiting for you.

mother, here’s metal more attractive.	No, good mother, here’s metal more attractive.	Mother, I have money that's more appealing.

Ophelia’s feet	Lady, shall I lie in your lap? (Lying down at Ophelia’s feet.)	Ophelia's feet

Lying down at Ophelia’s feet.)	Lady, shall I lie in your lap? (Lying down at Ophelia’s feet.)	(Lying down at Ophelia's feet.)

maids’ legs	That’s a fair thought to lie between maids’ legs.	women's genitals

thought to lie between maids’ legs.	That’s a fair thought to lie between maids’ legs.	something a woman might think about while lying down.

God, your only jig-maker.	O God, your only jig-maker. What should a man do but be merry?	God, you're the only one who makes me want to dance.

your only jig-maker	O God, your only jig-maker. What should a man do but be merry?	you who inspire joy

look you, how cheerfully my mother looks, and my father died within these two hours.	What should a man do but be merry? for, look you, how cheerfully my mother looks, and my father died within these two hours.	See how happy my mother looks, even though my father died just two hours ago.

Nay, ’tis twice two months, my lord.	Nay, ’tis twice two months, my lord.	No, it's been four months, my lord.

have a suit of sables.	So long? Nay then, let the devil wear black, for I’ll have a suit of sables. O heavens!	I'll buy expensive furs.

thinking on, with the hobby-horse, whose epitaph is “For, O, for, O, the hobby-horse is forgot.”	die two months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there’s hope a great man’s memory may outlive his life half a year: but, by’r lady, he must build churches, then; or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the hobby-horse, whose epitaph is “For, O, for, O, the hobby-horse is forgot.”	being remembered, like the forgotten hobby-horse, whose rhyme is "Oh, oh, oh, the hobby-horse is forgotten."

a great man’s memory	die two months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there’s hope a great man’s memory may outlive his life half a year: but, by’r lady, he must build churches, then; or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the hobby-horse, whose epitaph is “For, O, for, O, the hobby-horse is forgot.”	a great man's reputation

, by’r lady	die two months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there’s hope a great man’s memory may outlive his life half a year: but, by’r lady, he must build churches, then; or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the hobby-horse, whose epitaph is “For, O, for, O, the hobby-horse is forgot.”	by our lady

miching mallecho; it means mischief.	Marry, this is miching mallecho; it means mischief.	That sounds like sneaky wrongdoing; it means mischief.

know by this fellow: the players cannot keep counsel; they’ll tell all.	We shall know by this fellow: the players cannot keep counsel; they’ll tell all.	We can tell by this guy that actors can't keep a secret; they'll tell everything.

beg your hearing patiently.	For us, and for our tragedy, Here stooping to your clemency, We beg your hearing patiently. (Exit.)	Please listen to us patiently.

posy of a ring?	Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring?	Like the inscription inside a ring?

’Tis brief	’Tis brief, my lord.	It is short.

woman’s love	As woman’s love.	woman's love

Phoebus’ cart	Full thirty times hath Phoebus’ cart gone round Neptune’s salt wash and Tellus’ orbed ground, And thirty dozen moons with borrow’d sheen About the world have times twelve thirties been Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands Unite commutual in most sacred bands.	The sun.

round Neptune’s salt wash	Full thirty times hath Phoebus’ cart gone round Neptune’s salt wash and Tellus’ orbed ground, And thirty dozen moons with borrow’d sheen About the world have times twelve thirties been Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands Unite commutual in most sacred bands.	around the salty sea

moons with borrow’d sheen About the world have times twelve thirties been Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands Unite commutual in most sacred bands.	Full thirty times hath Phoebus’ cart gone round Neptune’s salt wash and Tellus’ orbed ground, And thirty dozen moons with borrow’d sheen About the world have times twelve thirties been Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands Unite commutual in most sacred bands.	Three hundred and sixty moons have passed since love and marriage joined our hearts and hands in a sacred bond.

’ orbed ground	Full thirty times hath Phoebus’ cart gone round Neptune’s salt wash and Tellus’ orbed ground, And thirty dozen moons with borrow’d sheen About the world have times twelve thirties been Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands Unite commutual in most sacred bands.	round Earth

ere love	So many journeys may the sun and moon Make us again count o’er ere love be done! But, woe is me, you are so sick of late, So far from cheer and from your former state, That I distrust you.	before love

far from cheer and from your former state, That I distrust you.	So many journeys may the sun and moon Make us again count o’er ere love be done! But, woe is me, you are so sick of late, So far from cheer and from your former state, That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust, Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must: For women’s fear and love holds quantity;	Not happy and not your old self, that's why I don't trust you.

distrust, Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must: For women’s fear and love holds quantity;	But, woe is me, you are so sick of late, So far from cheer and from your former state, That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust, Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must: For women’s fear and love holds quantity; In neither aught, or in extremity.	distrust you, my lord, but don't let it upset you: a woman's fear and love are always in large amounts.

women’s fear	But, woe is me, you are so sick of late, So far from cheer and from your former state, That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust, Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must: For women’s fear and love holds quantity; In neither aught, or in extremity.	women's fear

neither aught	Yet, though I distrust, Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must: For women’s fear and love holds quantity; In neither aught, or in extremity. Now, what my love is, proof hath made you know; And as my love is sized, my fear is so: Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear; Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.	nothing at all

is so: Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear; Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.	In neither aught, or in extremity. Now, what my love is, proof hath made you know; And as my love is sized, my fear is so: Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear; Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.	That's how it is: When love is strong, even small doubts feel like fears; When small fears become big, love grows even bigger.

let me be accurst!	O, confound the rest! Such love must needs be treason in my breast: In second husband let me be accurst! None wed the second but who kill’d the first.	May I be cursed!

Wormwood, wormwood.	(Aside.) Wormwood, wormwood.	Wormwood, wormwood.

none of love: A second time I kill my husband dead, When second husband kisses me in bed.	The instances that second marriage move Are base respects of thrift, but none of love: A second time I kill my husband dead, When second husband kisses me in bed.	No love is involved: It's like I kill my first husband again, every time my second husband kisses me.

pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt: What to ourselves in passion we propose, The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.	Purpose is but the slave to memory, Of violent birth, but poor validity: Which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the tree; But fall, unshaken, when they mellow be. Most necessary ’tis that we forget To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt: What to ourselves in passion we propose, The passion ending, doth the purpose lose. The violence of either grief or joy Their own enactures with themselves destroy: Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament; Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.	fulfill the promises we make to ourselves, because the promises we make when we're emotional disappear when the emotion fades.

Most necessary ’tis	Purpose is but the slave to memory, Of violent birth, but poor validity: Which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the tree; But fall, unshaken, when they mellow be. Most necessary ’tis that we forget To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt: What to ourselves in passion we propose, The passion ending, doth the purpose lose. The violence of either grief or joy Their own enactures with themselves destroy: Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament; Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.	It's very important

Their own enactures	Most necessary ’tis that we forget To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt: What to ourselves in passion we propose, The passion ending, doth the purpose lose. The violence of either grief or joy Their own enactures with themselves destroy: Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament; Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident. This world is not for aye, nor ’tis not strange That even our loves should with our fortunes change; For ’tis a question left us yet to prove, Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love.	Their own decisions

slender accident	Most necessary ’tis that we forget To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt: What to ourselves in passion we propose, The passion ending, doth the purpose lose. The violence of either grief or joy Their own enactures with themselves destroy: Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament; Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident. This world is not for aye, nor ’tis not strange That even our loves should with our fortunes change; For ’tis a question left us yet to prove, Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love.	small chance event

either grief	Most necessary ’tis that we forget To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt: What to ourselves in passion we propose, The passion ending, doth the purpose lose. The violence of either grief or joy Their own enactures with themselves destroy: Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament; Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident. This world is not for aye, nor ’tis not strange That even our loves should with our fortunes change; For ’tis a question left us yet to prove, Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love.	grief

grieves, on slender accident.	Most necessary ’tis that we forget To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt: What to ourselves in passion we propose, The passion ending, doth the purpose lose. The violence of either grief or joy Their own enactures with themselves destroy: Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament; Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident. This world is not for aye, nor ’tis not strange That even our loves should with our fortunes change; For ’tis a question left us yet to prove, Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love.	grieves, over small things.

Grief joys	Most necessary ’tis that we forget To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt: What to ourselves in passion we propose, The passion ending, doth the purpose lose. The violence of either grief or joy Their own enactures with themselves destroy: Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament; Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident. This world is not for aye, nor ’tis not strange That even our loves should with our fortunes change; For ’tis a question left us yet to prove, Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love.	Grief rejoices.

should with our fortunes change; For ’tis a question left us yet to prove, Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love.	The violence of either grief or joy Their own enactures with themselves destroy: Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament; Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident. This world is not for aye, nor ’tis not strange That even our loves should with our fortunes change; For ’tis a question left us yet to prove, Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love. The great man down, you mark his favourite flies; The poor advanced makes friends of enemies.	should change along with our luck; Because we still have to figure out if love controls our luck, or if luck controls our love.

love on fortune tend; For who not needs shall never lack a friend, And who in want a hollow friend doth try, Directly seasons him his enemy.	The great man down, you mark his favourite flies; The poor advanced makes friends of enemies. And hitherto doth love on fortune tend; For who not needs shall never lack a friend, And who in want a hollow friend doth try, Directly seasons him his enemy. But, orderly to end where I begun, Our wills and fates do so contrary run That our devices still are overthrown; Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own: So think thou wilt no second husband wed; But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.	Love follows wealth; the rich will always have friends. But if you're poor and test a false friend, you'll quickly find they become your enemy.

die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.	And hitherto doth love on fortune tend; For who not needs shall never lack a friend, And who in want a hollow friend doth try, Directly seasons him his enemy. But, orderly to end where I begun, Our wills and fates do so contrary run That our devices still are overthrown; Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own: So think thou wilt no second husband wed; But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.	Forget about love when your first husband dies.

Sport and repose lock	Nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light! Sport and repose lock from me day and night! To desperation turn my trust and hope!	Take away fun and rest.

An anchor’s cheer	To desperation turn my trust and hope! An anchor’s cheer in prison be my scope! Each opposite that blanks the face of joy Meet what I would have well and it destroy!	Let my only joy be in prison.

cheer in prison be my scope!	To desperation turn my trust and hope! An anchor’s cheer in prison be my scope! Each opposite that blanks the face of joy Meet what I would have well and it destroy!	Let my happiness be limited to a prison cell!

face of joy Meet what I would have well and it destroy!	An anchor’s cheer in prison be my scope! Each opposite that blanks the face of joy Meet what I would have well and it destroy! Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife, If, once a widow, ever I be wife!	May whatever ruins joy also ruin what I desire and destroys it!

lasting strife	Each opposite that blanks the face of joy Meet what I would have well and it destroy! Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife, If, once a widow, ever I be wife!	endless conflict

The tedious day	’Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile; My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile The tedious day with sleep. (Sleeps.)	The boring day

beguile The tedious day with sleep.	’Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile; My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile The tedious day with sleep. (Sleeps.)	pass the long, boring day with sleep.

come mischance between us twain!	Sleep rock thy brain; And never come mischance between us twain! (Exit.)	let no bad luck come between us!

Madam, how like you this play?	Madam, how like you this play?	Madam, how do you like this play?

poison in jest; no offence i’ the world.	No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest; no offence i’ the world.	Just a joke with no harm intended; no offense meant.

the duke’s name	This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna: Gonzago is the duke’s name; his wife, Baptista: you shall see anon; ’tis a knavish piece of work: but what o’ that? your majesty and we that have free souls, it touches us not: let the galled jade wince, our withers are unwrung.	the duke's name

piece of work: but what o’ that?	This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna: Gonzago is the duke’s name; his wife, Baptista: you shall see anon; ’tis a knavish piece of work: but what o’ that? your majesty and we that have free souls, it touches us not: let the galled jade wince, our withers are unwrung.	play; but so what?

a knavish piece	This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna: Gonzago is the duke’s name; his wife, Baptista: you shall see anon; ’tis a knavish piece of work: but what o’ that? your majesty and we that have free souls, it touches us not: let the galled jade wince, our withers are unwrung.	a sneaky play

the galled jade wince	Gonzago is the duke’s name; his wife, Baptista: you shall see anon; ’tis a knavish piece of work: but what o’ that? your majesty and we that have free souls, it touches us not: let the galled jade wince, our withers are unwrung.	Let the horse with sores on its back flinch.

we that have free souls, it touches us not: let the galled jade wince, our withers are unwrung.	Gonzago is the duke’s name; his wife, Baptista: you shall see anon; ’tis a knavish piece of work: but what o’ that? your majesty and we that have free souls, it touches us not: let the galled jade wince, our withers are unwrung.	it doesn't affect those of us with clear consciences: let the guilty react, we're not involved.

one Lucianus	This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.	Lucianus.

nephew to the king.	This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.	the king's nephew.

see the puppets dallying.	I could interpret between you and your love, if I could see the puppets dallying.	see the puppets flirting.

groaning to take off my edge.	It would cost you a groaning to take off my edge.	It would cost you a lot to get the better of me.

thy damnable faces	So you must take your husbands. Begin, murderer; pox, leave thy damnable faces, and begin. Come: “the croaking raven doth bellow for revenge.”	your cursed faces

murderer; pox, leave thy damnable faces, and begin.	So you must take your husbands. Begin, murderer; pox, leave thy damnable faces, and begin. Come: “the croaking raven doth bellow for revenge.”	Murderer, get rid of your disgusting expressions and start.

bellow for revenge.”	Begin, murderer; pox, leave thy damnable faces, and begin. Come: “the croaking raven doth bellow for revenge.”	cries for revenge.

the croaking raven	Begin, murderer; pox, leave thy damnable faces, and begin. Come: “the croaking raven doth bellow for revenge.”	the croaking raven

wholesome life	Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing; Confederate season, else no creature seeing; Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected, With Hecate’s ban thrice blasted, thrice infected, Thy natural magic and dire property, On wholesome life usurp immediately. (Pours the poison into the sleeper’s ears.)	healthy life

dire property	Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing; Confederate season, else no creature seeing; Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected, With Hecate’s ban thrice blasted, thrice infected, Thy natural magic and dire property, On wholesome life usurp immediately. (Pours the poison into the sleeper’s ears.)	terrible power

usurp immediately.	Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing; Confederate season, else no creature seeing; Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected, With Hecate’s ban thrice blasted, thrice infected, Thy natural magic and dire property, On wholesome life usurp immediately. (Pours the poison into the sleeper’s ears.)	take over right now.

Hecate’s ban	Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing; Confederate season, else no creature seeing; Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected, With Hecate’s ban thrice blasted, thrice infected, Thy natural magic and dire property, On wholesome life usurp immediately. (Pours the poison into the sleeper’s ears.)	Hecate's curse

the sleeper’s ears	Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing; Confederate season, else no creature seeing; Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected, With Hecate’s ban thrice blasted, thrice infected, Thy natural magic and dire property, On wholesome life usurp immediately. (Pours the poison into the sleeper’s ears.)	the sleeper's ears

Pours the poison into the sleeper’s ears.)	Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing; Confederate season, else no creature seeing; Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected, With Hecate’s ban thrice blasted, thrice infected, Thy natural magic and dire property, On wholesome life usurp immediately. (Pours the poison into the sleeper’s ears.)	(Pours the poison into the sleeper's ears.)

i’ the garden for’s estate.	He poisons him i’ the garden for’s estate. His name’s Gonzago: the story is extant, and writ in choice	in the garden for his inheritance.

writ in choice	He poisons him i’ the garden for’s estate. His name’s Gonzago: the story is extant, and writ in choice Italian: you shall see anon how the murderer gets the love of Gonzago’s wife.	written in fine

Gonzago’s wife	His name’s Gonzago: the story is extant, and writ in choice Italian: you shall see anon how the murderer gets the love of Gonzago’s wife.	Gonzago's wife

love of Gonzago’s wife.	His name’s Gonzago: the story is extant, and writ in choice Italian: you shall see anon how the murderer gets the love of Gonzago’s wife.	Gonzago's wife falling in love.

frighted with false fire!	What, frighted with false fire!	Scared by something fake!

all but Hamlet and Horatio.)	Lights, lights, lights! (Exeunt all but Hamlet and Horatio.)	Everyone leaves except Hamlet and Horatio.

The hart ungalled play	Why, let the stricken deer go weep, The hart ungalled play; For some must watch, while some must sleep: So runs the world away. Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers—if the rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me—with two Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players, sir?	Let the unwounded deer play.

the stricken deer	Why, let the stricken deer go weep, The hart ungalled play; For some must watch, while some must sleep: So runs the world away. Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers—if the rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me—with two Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players, sir?	the wounded deer

sleep: So runs the world away.	Why, let the stricken deer go weep, The hart ungalled play; For some must watch, while some must sleep: So runs the world away. Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers—if the rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me—with two Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players, sir?	sleep: That's how the world goes.

rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me—with two Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players, sir?	Why, let the stricken deer go weep, The hart ungalled play; For some must watch, while some must sleep: So runs the world away. Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers—if the rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me—with two Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players, sir?	if I lose all my money and have just these fancy shoes, could I get a job with a group of actors?

my razed shoes	Why, let the stricken deer go weep, The hart ungalled play; For some must watch, while some must sleep: So runs the world away. Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers—if the rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me—with two Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players, sir?	my slashed shoes

was Of Jove himself; and now reigns here A very, very—pajock.	A whole one, I. For thou dost know, O Damon dear, This realm dismantled was Of Jove himself; and now reigns here A very, very—pajock.	was ruled by Jupiter himself; and now a peacock reigns here.

A very, very—pajock	A whole one, I. For thou dost know, O Damon dear, This realm dismantled was Of Jove himself; and now reigns here A very, very—pajock.	A very, very—peacock.

the ghost’s word	O good Horatio, I’ll take the ghost’s word for a thousand pound. Didst perceive?	What the ghost said.

take the ghost’s word for a thousand pound.	O good Horatio, I’ll take the ghost’s word for a thousand pound. Didst perceive?	I believe the ghost more than I'd believe someone with a thousand pounds.

talk of the poisoning?	Upon the talk of the poisoning?	Talk of the poisoning?

king like not the comedy, Why then, belike, he likes it not, perdy.	come, the recorders! For if the king like not the comedy, Why then, belike, he likes it not, perdy. Come, some music!	If the king doesn't like the play, well then, it seems he truly doesn't like it.

Is in his retirement marvellous distempered.	Is in his retirement marvellous distempered.	He's terribly upset in his retirement.

lord, rather with choler.	No, my lord, rather with choler.	rather with anger.

far more choler	Your wisdom should show itself more richer to signify this to his doctor; for, for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps plunge him into far more choler.	much more anger

put him to his purgation would perhaps plunge him into far more choler.	Your wisdom should show itself more richer to signify this to his doctor; for, for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps plunge him into far more choler.	Forcing him to cleanse himself might make him much angrier.

wildly from my affair.	Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame and start not so wildly from my affair.	so randomly about my problem.

sir: pronounce.	I am tame, sir: pronounce.	sir: tell me what you want to say.

most great affliction	The queen, your mother, in most great affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you.	great distress

please you to make me a wholesome answer, I will do your mother’s commandment: if not, your pardon and my return shall be the end of my business.	Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right breed. If it shall please you to make me a wholesome answer, I will do your mother’s commandment: if not, your pardon and my return shall be the end of my business.	If you give me a proper answer, I will do what your mother asked. If not, I'll say goodbye and leave.

your mother’s commandment	Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right breed. If it shall please you to make me a wholesome answer, I will do your mother’s commandment: if not, your pardon and my return shall be the end of my business.	your mother's request

’s diseased: but, sir, such answer as I can make, you shall command; or, rather, as you say, my mother: therefore no more, but to the matter: my mother, you say—	Make you a wholesome answer; my wit’s diseased: but, sir, such answer as I can make, you shall command; or, rather, as you say, my mother: therefore no more, but to the matter: my mother, you say—	is unwell, but sir, you can have whatever answer I am able to give. Or rather, as you said, my mother can. So, let's get to the point: my mother, you say—

struck her into amazement and admiration.	Then thus she says; your behavior hath struck her into amazement and admiration.	amazed and impressed her.

son, that can so astonish a mother!	O wonderful son, that can so astonish a mother! But is there no sequel at the heels of this mother’s admiration?	son, you really know how to surprise your mother!

this mother’s admiration	O wonderful son, that can so astonish a mother! But is there no sequel at the heels of this mother’s admiration? Impart.	my admiration

heels of this mother’s admiration?	O wonderful son, that can so astonish a mother! But is there no sequel at the heels of this mother’s admiration? Impart.	What comes after this praise from your mother?

cause of distemper?	Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? you do, surely, bar the door upon your own liberty, if you deny your griefs to your friend.	What's making you upset?

deny your griefs to your friend.	Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? you do, surely, bar the door upon your own liberty, if you deny your griefs to your friend.	Don't hide your sorrows from your friend.

voice of the king himself for your succession in Denmark?	How can that be, when you have the voice of the king himself for your succession in Denmark?	the king himself chose you to rule Denmark?

withdraw with you:)—why do you go about to recover the wind of me, as if you would drive me into a toil?	let me see one. (To withdraw with you:)—why do you go about to recover the wind of me, as if you would drive me into a toil?	Why are you trying to get upwind of me, like you're trying to trap me?

be too bold, my love is too unmannerly.	O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too unmannerly.	If I'm being too forward, it's because my love makes me rude.

most eloquent music	’Tis as easy as lying: govern these ventages with your fingers and thumb, give it breath with your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent music. Look you, these are the stops.	very beautiful music

give it breath with your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent music.	’Tis as easy as lying: govern these ventages with your fingers and thumb, give it breath with your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent music. Look you, these are the stops.	Breathe into it, and it will make beautiful music.

command to any utterance of harmony; I have not the skill.	But these cannot I command to any utterance of harmony; I have not the skill.	I can't make them create beautiful music; I don't have the talent.

music, excellent voice, in this little organ; yet cannot you make it speak. ’	Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me! You would play upon me; you would seem to know my stops; you would pluck out the heart of my mystery; you would sound me from my lowest note to the top of my compass: and there is much music, excellent voice, in this little organ; yet cannot you make it speak. ’ Sblood, do you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe?	There's music and a great sound in this small instrument, but you can't get it to play.

played on than a pipe?	You would play upon me; you would seem to know my stops; you would pluck out the heart of my mystery; you would sound me from my lowest note to the top of my compass: and there is much music, excellent voice, in this little organ; yet cannot you make it speak. ’ Sblood, do you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe? Call me what instrument you will, though you can fret me, yet you cannot play upon me.	easier to manipulate than a flute?

yonder cloud	Do you see yonder cloud that’s almost in shape of a camel?	that cloud

tis like a camel, indeed.	By the mass, and ’tis like a camel, indeed.	It really does look like a camel.

is like a weasel.	Methinks it is like a weasel.	is like a weasel.

backed like a weasel.	It is backed like a weasel.	It has an arched back like a weasel.

fool me to the top of my bent.)	Then I will come to my mother by and by. (They fool me to the top of my bent.) I will come by and by.	They completely deceive me.

(Exit Polonius	By and by is easily said. (Exit Polonius.) Leave me, friends.	(Polonius exits)

all but Hamlet.)	Leave me, friends. (Exeunt all but Hamlet.)	(Everyone leaves except Hamlet.)

Letters, my lord, from Hamlet: This to your majesty; this to the queen.	Letters, my lord, from Hamlet: This to your majesty; this to the queen.	Letters, my lord, from Hamlet: This one's for you, your majesty; this one's for the queen.

received them Of him that brought them.	Sailors, my lord, they say; I saw them not: They were given me by Claudio; he received them Of him that brought them.	He got them from the person who brought them.

beg leave to see your kingly eyes: when I shall, first asking your pardon thereunto, recount the occasion of my sudden and more strange return.	To-morrow shall I beg leave to see your kingly eyes: when I shall, first asking your pardon thereunto, recount the occasion of my sudden and more strange return.	May I see you tomorrow? I will first apologize for my abrupt and unexpected return, and then explain why I came back.

your kingly eyes	To-morrow shall I beg leave to see your kingly eyes: when I shall, first asking your pardon thereunto, recount the occasion of my sudden and more strange return.	You.

my sudden and more strange return	To-morrow shall I beg leave to see your kingly eyes: when I shall, first asking your pardon thereunto, recount the occasion of my sudden and more strange return.	my quick and unexpected return

’Tis Hamlet’s character	’Tis Hamlet’s character.	It is Hamlet's character.

the very sickness	But let him come; It warms the very sickness in my heart, That I shall live and tell him to his teeth, “Thus didest thou.”	the deep pain

tell him to his teeth, “Thus didest thou.”	But let him come; It warms the very sickness in my heart, That I shall live and tell him to his teeth, “Thus didest thou.”	tell him to his face, "This is what you did."

be so, Laertes— As how should it be so?	If it be so, Laertes— As how should it be so? how otherwise?— Will you be ruled by me?	be the case, Laertes— but how could that be?

o’errule me to a peace.	Ay, my lord; So you will not o’errule me to a peace.	force me into a peace.

thine own peace	To thine own peace.	your own peace

breathe, But even his mother shall uncharge the practice And call it accident.	If he be now return’d, As checking at his voyage, and that he means No more to undertake it, I will work him To an exploit, now ripe in my device, Under the which he shall not choose but fall: And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe, But even his mother shall uncharge the practice And call it accident.	no one will blame me for his death; even his mother will dismiss it as an accident.

devise it so That I might be the organ.	My lord, I will be ruled; The rather, if you could devise it so That I might be the organ.	arrange it so that I can be the one to do it.

such envy	You have been talk’d of since your travel much, And that in Hamlet’s hearing, for a quality Wherein, they say, you shine: your sum of parts Did not together pluck such envy from him As did that one, and that, in my regard, Of the unworthiest siege.	so much jealousy

Hamlet’s hearing	You have been talk’d of since your travel much, And that in Hamlet’s hearing, for a quality Wherein, they say, you shine: your sum of parts Did not together pluck such envy from him As did that one, and that, in my regard, Of the unworthiest siege.	Hamlet overhearing

the unworthiest siege	You have been talk’d of since your travel much, And that in Hamlet’s hearing, for a quality Wherein, they say, you shine: your sum of parts Did not together pluck such envy from him As did that one, and that, in my regard, Of the unworthiest siege.	the least important thing to focus on

that in Hamlet’s hearing, for a quality Wherein, they say, you shine: your sum of parts Did not together pluck such envy from him As did that one, and that, in my regard, Of the unworthiest siege.	You have been talk’d of since your travel much, And that in Hamlet’s hearing, for a quality Wherein, they say, you shine: your sum of parts Did not together pluck such envy from him As did that one, and that, in my regard, Of the unworthiest siege.	Hamlet has heard people talking about a talent you possess. People say you excel at it. None of your other qualities made him as envious as that one, which, in my opinion, isn't even worth being jealous of.

cap of youth, Yet needful too; for youth no less becomes The light and careless livery that it wears Than settled age his sables and his weeds, Importing health and graveness.	A very riband in the cap of youth, Yet needful too; for youth no less becomes The light and careless livery that it wears Than settled age his sables and his weeds, Importing health and graveness.	Something young people should have, and it's important; because youth suits youthful, carefree clothes just as much as older age suits dark, serious clothing that suggests health and dignity.

The light and careless livery	A very riband in the cap of youth, Yet needful too; for youth no less becomes The light and careless livery that it wears Than settled age his sables and his weeds, Importing health and graveness.	The carefree clothes

Come short of what he did.	Two months since, Here was a gentleman of Normandy:— I’ve seen myself, and served against, the French, And they can well on horseback: but this gallant Had witchcraft in’t; he grew unto his seat; And to such wondrous doing brought his horse, As he had been incorpsed and demi-natured With the brave beast: so far he topp’d my thought, That I, in forgery of shapes and tricks, Come short of what he did.	Couldn't match what he did.

such wondrous doing	Two months since, Here was a gentleman of Normandy:— I’ve seen myself, and served against, the French, And they can well on horseback: but this gallant Had witchcraft in’t; he grew unto his seat; And to such wondrous doing brought his horse, As he had been incorpsed and demi-natured With the brave beast: so far he topp’d my thought, That I, in forgery of shapes and tricks, Come short of what he did.	such amazing feats

life, Lamond.	Upon my life, Lamond.	life, Lamond.

especial, That he cried out, ’twould be a sight indeed, If one could match you: the scrimers of their nation, He swore, had had neither motion, guard, nor eye, If you opposed them.	He made confession of you, And gave you such a masterly report For art and exercise in your defence And for your rapier most especial, That he cried out, ’twould be a sight indeed, If one could match you: the scrimers of their nation, He swore, had had neither motion, guard, nor eye, If you opposed them.	special, that he exclaimed it would be amazing if anyone could compete with you. He swore their nation's fencers would have no movement, defense, or awareness if you fought them.

such a masterly report	He made confession of you, And gave you such a masterly report For art and exercise in your defence And for your rapier most especial, That he cried out, ’twould be a sight indeed, If one could match you: the scrimers of their nation, He swore, had had neither motion, guard, nor eye, If you opposed them.	such a glowing account

his Did Hamlet	Sir, this report of his Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy That he could nothing do but wish and beg Your sudden coming o’er, to play with him. Now, out of this—	Hamlet's report

Your sudden coming o’er	Sir, this report of his Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy That he could nothing do but wish and beg Your sudden coming o’er, to play with him. Now, out of this—	Your quick return

are you like the painting of a sorrow, A face without a heart?	Laertes, was your father dear to you? Or are you like the painting of a sorrow, A face without a heart?	Are you just pretending to be sad, with no real feeling?

passages of proof, Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.	Not that I think you did not love your father; But that I know love is begun by time; And that I see, in passages of proof, Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.	examples that show time changes the intensity of love.

a like goodness	There lives within the very flame of love A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it; And nothing is at a like goodness still; For goodness, growing to a plurisy, Dies in his own too much: that we would do, We should do when we would; for this “would” changes And hath abatements and delays as many As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents; And then this “should” is like a spendthrift sigh, That hurts by easing.	the same level of goodness

lives within the very flame of love A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it; And nothing is at a like goodness still;	There lives within the very flame of love A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it; And nothing is at a like goodness still; For goodness, growing to a plurisy, Dies in his own too much: that we would do, We should do when we would; for this “would” changes And hath abatements and delays as many As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents; And then this “should” is like a spendthrift sigh, That hurts by easing.	Even in the hottest love, there's something that can weaken it; nothing stays perfectly good forever.

a spendthrift sigh	There lives within the very flame of love A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it; And nothing is at a like goodness still; For goodness, growing to a plurisy, Dies in his own too much: that we would do, We should do when we would; for this “would” changes And hath abatements and delays as many As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents; And then this “should” is like a spendthrift sigh, That hurts by easing.	a wasteful sigh

your father’s son	But, to the quick o’ the ulcer:— Hamlet comes back: what would you undertake, To show yourself your father’s son in deed More than in words?	your father's true son

undertake, To show yourself your father’s son in deed More than in words?	But, to the quick o’ the ulcer:— Hamlet comes back: what would you undertake, To show yourself your father’s son in deed More than in words?	What would you do to prove you're your father's son in action, not just words?

, good Laertes	But, good Laertes, Will you do this, keep close within your chamber.	, my good Laertes

sword unbated, and in a pass of practice Requite him for your father.	Hamlet return’d shall know you are come home: We’ll put on those shall praise your excellence And set a double varnish on the fame The Frenchman gave you, bring you in fine together And wager on your heads: he, being remiss, Most generous and free from all contriving, Will not peruse the foils; so that, with ease, Or with a little shuffling, you may choose A sword unbated, and in a pass of practice Requite him for your father.	choose a sword with no button, and in a practice bout, get revenge for your father.

a little shuffling	Hamlet return’d shall know you are come home: We’ll put on those shall praise your excellence And set a double varnish on the fame The Frenchman gave you, bring you in fine together And wager on your heads: he, being remiss, Most generous and free from all contriving, Will not peruse the foils; so that, with ease, Or with a little shuffling, you may choose A sword unbated, and in a pass of practice Requite him for your father.	A little cheating.

a double varnish	Hamlet return’d shall know you are come home: We’ll put on those shall praise your excellence And set a double varnish on the fame The Frenchman gave you, bring you in fine together And wager on your heads: he, being remiss, Most generous and free from all contriving, Will not peruse the foils; so that, with ease, Or with a little shuffling, you may choose A sword unbated, and in a pass of practice Requite him for your father.	a boosted reputation

anoint my sword.	I will do’t: And, for that purpose, I’ll anoint my sword.	I'll prepare my sword.

gall him slightly, It may be death.	I bought an unction of a mountebank, So mortal that, but dip a knife in it, Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare, Collected from all simples that have virtue Under the moon, can save the thing from death That is but scratch’d withal: I’ll touch my point With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly, It may be death.	hurt him a little, it could kill him.

Twere better not assay’d: therefore this project Should have a back or second, that might hold, If this should blast in proof.	Let’s further think of this; Weigh what convenience both of time and means May fit us to our shape: if this should fail, And that our drift look through our bad performance, ’Twere better not assay’d: therefore this project Should have a back or second, that might hold, If this should blast in proof.	It's better not to try it at all; therefore, this plan should have a backup, something that can hold if this one fails.

a solemn wager	Soft! let me see: We’ll make a solemn wager on your cunnings: I ha’t.	a serious bet

make a solemn wager on your cunnings: I ha’t.	Soft! let me see: We’ll make a solemn wager on your cunnings: I ha’t.	Let's make a serious bet on your skills: I've got it.

drown’d, Laertes.	One woe doth tread upon another’s heel, So fast they follow: your sister’s drown’d, Laertes.	drowned, Laertes.

One woe	One woe doth tread upon another’s heel, So fast they follow: your sister’s drown’d, Laertes.	One disaster

another’s heel	One woe doth tread upon another’s heel, So fast they follow: your sister’s drown’d, Laertes.	another's heel

your sister’s drown’d	One woe doth tread upon another’s heel, So fast they follow: your sister’s drown’d, Laertes.	Your sister has drowned.

the glassy stream	There is a willow grows aslant a brook, That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream; There with fantastic garlands did she come Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples That liberal shepherds give a grosser name, But our cold maids do dead men’s fingers call them: There, on the pendent boughs her coronet weeds Clambering to hang, an envious sliver broke; When down her weedy trophies and herself Fell in the weeping brook.	the clear stream

our cold maids	There is a willow grows aslant a brook, That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream; There with fantastic garlands did she come Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples That liberal shepherds give a grosser name, But our cold maids do dead men’s fingers call them: There, on the pendent boughs her coronet weeds Clambering to hang, an envious sliver broke; When down her weedy trophies and herself Fell in the weeping brook.	chaste girls

dead men’s fingers	There is a willow grows aslant a brook, That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream; There with fantastic garlands did she come Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples That liberal shepherds give a grosser name, But our cold maids do dead men’s fingers call them: There, on the pendent boughs her coronet weeds Clambering to hang, an envious sliver broke; When down her weedy trophies and herself Fell in the weeping brook.	a coarser name

her coronet weeds	There is a willow grows aslant a brook, That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream; There with fantastic garlands did she come Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples That liberal shepherds give a grosser name, But our cold maids do dead men’s fingers call them: There, on the pendent boughs her coronet weeds Clambering to hang, an envious sliver broke; When down her weedy trophies and herself Fell in the weeping brook.	the flowers she'd made into a crown

fantastic garlands	There is a willow grows aslant a brook, That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream; There with fantastic garlands did she come Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples That liberal shepherds give a grosser name, But our cold maids do dead men’s fingers call them: There, on the pendent boughs her coronet weeds Clambering to hang, an envious sliver broke; When down her weedy trophies and herself Fell in the weeping brook.	beautiful, imaginative flower arrangements

the weeping brook	There is a willow grows aslant a brook, That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream; There with fantastic garlands did she come Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples That liberal shepherds give a grosser name, But our cold maids do dead men’s fingers call them: There, on the pendent boughs her coronet weeds Clambering to hang, an envious sliver broke; When down her weedy trophies and herself Fell in the weeping brook.	the brook that seems to be crying

leaves in the glassy stream; There with fantastic garlands did she come Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples That liberal shepherds give a grosser name, But our cold maids do dead men’s fingers call them: There, on the pendent boughs her coronet weeds Clambering to hang, an envious sliver broke; When down her weedy trophies and herself Fell in the weeping brook.	There is a willow grows aslant a brook, That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream; There with fantastic garlands did she come Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples That liberal shepherds give a grosser name, But our cold maids do dead men’s fingers call them: There, on the pendent boughs her coronet weeds Clambering to hang, an envious sliver broke; When down her weedy trophies and herself Fell in the weeping brook.	leaves in the clear stream; There she came with elaborate garlands of wildflowers, nettles, daisies, and orchids that shepherds call by a vulgar name, but innocent girls call dead men’s fingers. There, trying to hang her garland on the overhanging branches, a spiteful branch broke; then down fell her weedy garland and she herself into the weeping brook.

the pendent boughs	There is a willow grows aslant a brook, That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream; There with fantastic garlands did she come Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples That liberal shepherds give a grosser name, But our cold maids do dead men’s fingers call them: There, on the pendent boughs her coronet weeds Clambering to hang, an envious sliver broke; When down her weedy trophies and herself Fell in the weeping brook.	the hanging branches

an envious sliver	There is a willow grows aslant a brook, That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream; There with fantastic garlands did she come Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples That liberal shepherds give a grosser name, But our cold maids do dead men’s fingers call them: There, on the pendent boughs her coronet weeds Clambering to hang, an envious sliver broke; When down her weedy trophies and herself Fell in the weeping brook.	a spiteful branch

her weedy trophies	There is a willow grows aslant a brook, That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream; There with fantastic garlands did she come Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples That liberal shepherds give a grosser name, But our cold maids do dead men’s fingers call them: There, on the pendent boughs her coronet weeds Clambering to hang, an envious sliver broke; When down her weedy trophies and herself Fell in the weeping brook.	the flowers she'd made into decorations

her own distress	Her clothes spread wide; And, mermaid-like, awhile they bore her up: Which time she chanted snatches of old tunes; As one incapable of her own distress, Or like a creature native and indued Unto that element: but long it could not be Till that her garments, heavy with their drink, Pull’d the poor wretch from her melodious lay To muddy death.	her own trouble

snatches of old tunes; As one incapable of her own distress, Or like a creature native and indued Unto that element: but long it could not be Till that her garments, heavy with their drink, Pull’d the poor wretch from her melodious lay To muddy death.	Her clothes spread wide; And, mermaid-like, awhile they bore her up: Which time she chanted snatches of old tunes; As one incapable of her own distress, Or like a creature native and indued Unto that element: but long it could not be Till that her garments, heavy with their drink, Pull’d the poor wretch from her melodious lay To muddy death.	fragments of old songs, as if unaware of her danger, or like a creature born and adapted to the water. But it couldn't last long before her clothes, heavy with water, dragged the poor girl from her singing to a muddy death.

the poor wretch	Her clothes spread wide; And, mermaid-like, awhile they bore her up: Which time she chanted snatches of old tunes; As one incapable of her own distress, Or like a creature native and indued Unto that element: but long it could not be Till that her garments, heavy with their drink, Pull’d the poor wretch from her melodious lay To muddy death.	the unfortunate girl

muddy death	Her clothes spread wide; And, mermaid-like, awhile they bore her up: Which time she chanted snatches of old tunes; As one incapable of her own distress, Or like a creature native and indued Unto that element: but long it could not be Till that her garments, heavy with their drink, Pull’d the poor wretch from her melodious lay To muddy death.	death in the mud

her melodious lay	Her clothes spread wide; And, mermaid-like, awhile they bore her up: Which time she chanted snatches of old tunes; As one incapable of her own distress, Or like a creature native and indued Unto that element: but long it could not be Till that her garments, heavy with their drink, Pull’d the poor wretch from her melodious lay To muddy death.	her beautiful song

Drown’d, drown’d.	Drown’d, drown’d.	Drowned, drowned.

much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia, And therefore I forbid my tears: but yet It is our trick; nature her custom holds, Let shame say what it will: when these are gone, The woman will be out.	Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia, And therefore I forbid my tears: but yet It is our trick; nature her custom holds, Let shame say what it will: when these are gone, The woman will be out.	You have had too much water, poor Ophelia, and so I will not cry. But still, it's what we do; nature takes its course, let shame say what it wants. When the tears are gone, the woman in me will be expressed.

speech of fire, that fain would blaze, But that this folly douts it.	Adieu, my lord: I have a speech of fire, that fain would blaze, But that this folly douts it. (Exit.)	A passionate speech I long to give, but my foolishness stifles it.

do to calm his rage!	Let’s follow, Gertrude: How much I had to do to calm his rage! Now fear I this will give it start again; Therefore let’s follow.	What I had to do to calm him down!

burial that wilfully seeks her own salvation?	Is she to be buried in Christian burial that wilfully seeks her own salvation?	burial of someone who deliberately took her own life?

Christian burial	Is she to be buried in Christian burial that wilfully seeks her own salvation?	Christian burial

sat on her, and finds it Christian burial.	I tell thee she is: and therefore make her grave straight: the crowner hath sat on her, and finds it Christian burial.	held an inquest on her, and says she deserves a Christian burial.

drowned herself in her own defence?	How can that be, unless she drowned herself in her own defence?	Killed herself trying to protect herself?

se offendendo	It must be “se offendendo;” it cannot be else.	in self-defense

lies the point: if I drown myself wittingly, it argues an act: and an act hath three branches; it is, to act, to do, to perform: argal, she drowned herself wittingly.	For here lies the point: if I drown myself wittingly, it argues an act: and an act hath three branches; it is, to act, to do, to perform: argal, she drowned herself wittingly.	Here's the thing: if I knowingly drown myself, it implies an action. And an action has three parts: to act, to do, to perform. Therefore, she knowingly drowned herself.

you, goodman delver—	Nay, but hear you, goodman delver—	Hey, you, gravedigger—

shortens not his own life.	Here lies the water; good: here stands the man; good: if the man go to this water, and drown himself, it is, will he, nill he, he goes—mark you that; but if the water come to him and drown him, he drowns not himself: argal, he that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his own life.	doesn't end his own life.

is’t; crowner’s quest law.	Ay, marry, is’t; crowner’s quest law.	Yes, that's right; it's coroner's inquest law.

Ay, marry, is’t	Ay, marry, is’t; crowner’s quest law.	Yes, indeed it is.

crowner’s quest law	Ay, marry, is’t; crowner’s quest law.	coroner's inquest law

been a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o’ Christian burial.	Will you ha’ the truth on’t? If this had not been a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o’ Christian burial.	been a gentlewoman, she wouldn't have been given a Christian burial.

’ Christian burial	Will you ha’ the truth on’t? If this had not been a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o’ Christian burial.	Christian burial

the more pity	Why, there thou say’st: and the more pity that great folk should have countenance in this world to drown or hang themselves, more than their even Christian.	It's a greater shame.

have countenance in this world to drown or hang themselves, more than their even Christian.	Why, there thou say’st: and the more pity that great folk should have countenance in this world to drown or hang themselves, more than their even Christian.	are allowed to kill themselves, when ordinary people are not.

Adam’s profession	There is no ancient gentleman but gardeners, ditchers, and grave-makers: they hold up Adam’s profession.	Adam's job

confess thyself—	The Scripture says “Adam digged:” could he dig without arms? I’ll put another question to thee: if thou answerest me not to the purpose, confess thyself—	Confess you're wrong.

stronger than either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?	What is he that builds stronger than either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?	stronger than a bricklayer, a shipbuilder, or a woodworker?

The gallows-maker	The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a thousand tenants.	The person who makes gallows

outlives a thousand tenants.	The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a thousand tenants.	lasts longer than a thousand people who are hanged on it.

those that do ill: now thou dost ill to say the gallows is built stronger than the church: argal, the gallows may do well to thee.	I like thy wit well, in good faith: the gallows does well; but how does it well? it does well to those that do ill: now thou dost ill to say the gallows is built stronger than the church: argal, the gallows may do well to thee.	...those who do wrong. You're wrong to say the gallows is built stronger than the church; therefore, the gallows might be good for you.

mason, a shipwright, or a carpenter?”	“Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or a carpenter?”	mason, a ship builder, or a carpenter?

more about it, for your dull ass will not mend his pace with beating; and, when you are asked this question next, say “a grave-maker:” the houses that he makes last till doomsday.	Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull ass will not mend his pace with beating; and, when you are asked this question next, say “a grave-maker:” the houses that he makes last till doomsday.	Don't think about it so hard, because you won't figure it out no matter how hard you try; and next time you're asked that question, say "a gravedigger," because the houses he makes last forever.

your dull ass	Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull ass will not mend his pace with beating; and, when you are asked this question next, say “a grave-maker:” the houses that he makes last till doomsday.	your stupid self

get thee to Yaughan: fetch me a stoup of liquor.	Go, get thee to Yaughan: fetch me a stoup of liquor. (Exit Second Clown.	Go to Yaughan and get me a jug of alcohol.

(Exit Second Clown	Go, get thee to Yaughan: fetch me a stoup of liquor. (Exit Second Clown. He digs and sings.)	Exit Second Clown

was very sweet, To contract, O, the time, for, ah, my behove, O, methought, there was nothing meet.	In youth, when I did love, did love, Methought it was very sweet, To contract, O, the time, for, ah, my behove, O, methought, there was nothing meet.	was very sweet, to shorten the time for my benefit, it seemed nothing was as good.

Custom hath	Custom hath made it in him a property of easiness.	He is used to it.

property of easiness.	Custom hath made it in him a property of easiness.	He's used to it.

the daintier sense	’Tis e’en so: the hand of little employment hath the daintier sense.	more sensitive feelings

’Tis e’en	’Tis e’en so: the hand of little employment hath the daintier sense.	It is so.

hand of little employment hath the daintier sense.	’Tis e’en so: the hand of little employment hath the daintier sense.	Those who don't work much have more refined tastes.

shipped me intil the land, As if I had never been such.	(Sings.) But age, with his stealing steps, Hath claw’d me in his clutch, And hath shipped me intil the land, As if I had never been such.	sent me to a place as if I never mattered.

jowls it to the ground, as if it were Cain’s jaw-bone, that did the first murder!	That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once: how the knave jowls it to the ground, as if it were Cain’s jaw-bone, that did the first murder! It might be the pate of a politician, which this ass now o’er-reaches; one that would circumvent God, might it not?	He slams it to the ground as if it were the jawbone Cain used to commit the first murder!

Cain’s jaw-bone	That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once: how the knave jowls it to the ground, as if it were Cain’s jaw-bone, that did the first murder! It might be the pate of a politician, which this ass now o’er-reaches; one that would circumvent God, might it not?	Cain's jawbone

pate of a politician, which this ass now o’er-reaches; one that would circumvent God, might it not?	That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once: how the knave jowls it to the ground, as if it were Cain’s jaw-bone, that did the first murder! It might be the pate of a politician, which this ass now o’er-reaches; one that would circumvent God, might it not?	the head of a politician, which this fool now hits too hard; someone who would try to outsmart God, wouldn't you say?

Or of a courtier; which could say “Good morrow, sweet lord!	Or of a courtier; which could say “Good morrow, sweet lord! How dost thou, good lord?”	Or a courtier who could say "Good morning, sweet lord!"

“Good morrow	Or of a courtier; which could say “Good morrow, sweet lord! How dost thou, good lord?”	Good morning

my lord such-a-one’s horse	How dost thou, good lord?” This might be my lord such-a-one, that praised my lord such-a-one’s horse, when he meant to beg it; might it not?	That specific lord's horse

lord such-a-one, that praised my lord such-a-one’s horse, when he meant to beg it; might it not?	How dost thou, good lord?” This might be my lord such-a-one, that praised my lord such-a-one’s horse, when he meant to beg it; might it not?	Someone who praised another's horse, when they really wanted to ask for it; couldn't that be the case?

knocked about the mazzard with a sexton’s spade: here’s fine revolution, an we had the trick to see’t.	Why, e’en so: and now my Lady Worm’s; chapless, and knocked about the mazzard with a sexton’s spade: here’s fine revolution, an we had the trick to see’t.	Hit in the head with a gravedigger's shovel: that's quite a change, if we could only understand it.

a sexton’s spade	Why, e’en so: and now my Lady Worm’s; chapless, and knocked about the mazzard with a sexton’s spade: here’s fine revolution, an we had the trick to see’t.	a gravedigger's shovel

play at loggats with ’em?	Did these bones cost no more the breeding, but to play at loggats with ’em? mine ache to think on’t.	use them as sticks in the game of loggats?

ache to think on’t.	Did these bones cost no more the breeding, but to play at loggats with ’em? mine ache to think on’t.	It pains me to think about it.

mine ache	Did these bones cost no more the breeding, but to play at loggats with ’em? mine ache to think on’t.	I ache.

spade, a spade,	(Sings.) A pick-axe, and a spade, a spade, For and a shrouding sheet: O, a pit of clay for to be made For such a guest is meet.	a spade, a spade

A pick-axe	(Sings.) A pick-axe, and a spade, a spade, For and a shrouding sheet: O, a pit of clay for to be made For such a guest is meet.	A pickaxe

a shrouding sheet	A pick-axe, and a spade, a spade, For and a shrouding sheet: O, a pit of clay for to be made For such a guest is meet.	a burial cloth

skull of a lawyer?	There’s another: why may not that be the skull of a lawyer? Where be his quiddities now, his quillets, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks?	skull of a lawyer?

, his quillets	There’s another: why may not that be the skull of a lawyer? Where be his quiddities now, his quillets, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock him about the sconce with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him of his action of battery?	his petty arguments

a dirty shovel	Where be his quiddities now, his quillets, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock him about the sconce with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him of his action of battery?	a dirty shovel

this rude knave	Where be his quiddities now, his quillets, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock him about the sconce with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him of his action of battery?	this rude rascal

fine of his fines, and the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full of fine dirt?	This fellow might be in’s time a great buyer of land, with his statutes, his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers, his recoveries: is this the fine of his fines, and the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full of fine dirt? will his vouchers vouch him no more of his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth of a pair of indentures?	the end of all his land deals and legal victories is to have his fancy head full of plain dirt?

his fine pate	This fellow might be in’s time a great buyer of land, with his statutes, his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers, his recoveries: is this the fine of his fines, and the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full of fine dirt? will his vouchers vouch him no more of his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth of a pair of indentures?	his bald head

his double vouchers	This fellow might be in’s time a great buyer of land, with his statutes, his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers, his recoveries: is this the fine of his fines, and the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full of fine dirt? will his vouchers vouch him no more of his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth of a pair of indentures?	his complex legal documents

length and breadth of a pair of indentures?	This fellow might be in’s time a great buyer of land, with his statutes, his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers, his recoveries: is this the fine of his fines, and the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full of fine dirt? will his vouchers vouch him no more of his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very conveyances of his lands will hardly lie in this box; and must the inheritor himself have no more, ha?	the size of a contract?

The very conveyances	will his vouchers vouch him no more of his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very conveyances of his lands will hardly lie in this box; and must the inheritor himself have no more, ha?	Even the documents transferring his land

inheritor himself have no more, ha?	will his vouchers vouch him no more of his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very conveyances of his lands will hardly lie in this box; and must the inheritor himself have no more, ha?	The heir gets nothing more than this, huh?

made of sheepskins?	Is not parchment made of sheepskins?	made of sheepskins?

Ay, my lord, and of calf-skins too.	Ay, my lord, and of calf-skins too.	Yes, my lord, and made of calfskin too.

sheep and calves which seek out assurance in that.	They are sheep and calves which seek out assurance in that.	sheep and calves that find comfort in that.

made For such a guest is meet.	(Sings.) O, a pit of clay for to be made For such a guest is meet.	Made, for such a guest is worthy.

lie in’t, and yet it is mine.	You lie out on’t, sir, and therefore it is not yours: for my part, I do not lie in’t, and yet it is mine.	live in it, and yet it is mine.

lie in’t, to be in’t and say it is thine: ’tis for the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou liest.	Thou dost lie in’t, to be in’t and say it is thine: ’tis for the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou liest.	You're lying to be in it and say it's yours: it's for the dead, not the living; therefore you're lying.

lie, sir; ’twill away again, from me to you.	’Tis a quick lie, sir; ’twill away again, from me to you.	It's a quick lie, sir; it'll pass quickly from me to you.

woman, sir; but, rest her soul, she’s dead.	One that was a woman, sir; but, rest her soul, she’s dead.	She was a woman, sir; may she rest in peace, she's dead.

speak by the card, or equivocation will undo us.	How absolute the knave is! we must speak by the card, or equivocation will undo us.	We must be precise in what we say, or ambiguity will ruin us.

note of it; the age is grown so picked that the toe of the peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, he galls his kibe.	By the Lord, Horatio, these three years I have taken a note of it; the age is grown so picked that the toe of the peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, he galls his kibe.	I've been watching this for three years, Horatio; the times are so refined that peasants are stepping on the heels of nobles, irritating them.

king Hamlet overcame Fortinbras.	Of all the days i’ the year, I came to’t that day that our last king Hamlet overcame Fortinbras.	King Hamlet defeated Fortinbras.

young Hamlet	Cannot you tell that? every fool can tell that: it was the very day that young Hamlet was born; he that is mad, and sent into England.	young Hamlet

was mad: he shall recover his wits there; or, if he do not, it’s no great matter there.	Why, because he was mad: he shall recover his wits there; or, if he do not, it’s no great matter there.	was crazy: he'll get his sanity back there; if he doesn't, it doesn't really matter.

e’en with losing his wits.	Faith, e’en with losing his wits.	even when he loses his mind.

sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.	Why, here in Denmark: I have been sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.	sexton here for thirty years, since I was a boy.

many pocky corses	I’ faith, if he be not rotten before he die—as we have many pocky corses now-a-days, that will scarce hold the laying in—he will last you some eight year or nine year: a tanner will last you nine year.	many bodies riddled with disease

hold the laying in—he will last you some eight year or nine year: a tanner will last you nine year.	I’ faith, if he be not rotten before he die—as we have many pocky corses now-a-days, that will scarce hold the laying in—he will last you some eight year or nine year: a tanner will last you nine year.	hold together long enough to be laid in the grave—he'll last eight or nine years; a tanner will last nine years.

a sore decayer	Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his trade, that he will keep out water a great while; and your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead body.	a bad cause of decay

your whoreson dead body	Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his trade, that he will keep out water a great while; and your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead body.	your rotten dead body

tanned with his trade, that he will keep out water a great while; and your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead body.	Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his trade, that he will keep out water a great while; and your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead body.	His skin is so toughened by his work that it will keep water out for a long time, and water really makes your damn dead body rot.

lain in the earth three and twenty years.	Here’s a skull now; this skull has lain in the earth three and twenty years.	been in the ground for twenty-three years.

A whoreson mad fellow	A whoreson mad fellow’s it was: whose do you think it was?	A crazy bastard

a mad rogue	A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! a’ poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once.	a crazy rascal

pestilence on him for a mad rogue!	A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! a’ poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once.	A curse on him for a crazy scoundrel!

poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once.	A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! a’ poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once.	He once poured a whole flagon of Rhine wine on my head.

skull, sir, was Yorick’s skull, the king’s jester.	This same skull, sir, was Yorick’s skull, the king’s jester.	That skull belonged to Yorick, the king's jester.

the king’s jester	This same skull, sir, was Yorick’s skull, the king’s jester.	the king's jester

This same skull	This same skull, sir, was Yorick’s skull, the king’s jester.	This very skull

Yorick’s skull	This same skull, sir, was Yorick’s skull, the king’s jester.	Yorick's skull

lips that I have kissed I know not how oft.	Here hung those lips that I have kissed I know not how oft.	lips that I've kissed countless times.

set the table on a roar?	your songs? your flashes of merriment, that were wont to set the table on a roar? Not one now, to mock your own grinning?	make everyone at the table laugh loudly?

your own grinning	your flashes of merriment, that were wont to set the table on a roar? Not one now, to mock your own grinning? quite chap-fallen?	your own smile

let her paint an inch thick, to this favour she must come; make her laugh at that.	quite chap-fallen? Now get you to my lady’s chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch thick, to this favour she must come; make her laugh at that.	Even if she wears a lot of makeup, she'll end up looking like this (a skull); make her laugh about that.

my lady’s chamber	quite chap-fallen? Now get you to my lady’s chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch thick, to this favour she must come; make her laugh at that.	my lady's room

Prithee, Horatio, tell me one thing.	Prithee, Horatio, tell me one thing.	Please, Horatio, tell me one thing.

return, Horatio!	To what base uses we may return, Horatio! Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of Alexander, till he find it stopping a bung-hole?	return, Horatio!

a bung-hole	To what base uses we may return, Horatio! Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of Alexander, till he find it stopping a bung-hole?	a hole in a barrel

trace the noble dust of Alexander, till he find it stopping a bung-hole?	To what base uses we may return, Horatio! Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of Alexander, till he find it stopping a bung-hole?	Follow Alexander the Great's remains until they're used to plug a beer barrel?

Twere to consider too curiously, to consider so.	’Twere to consider too curiously, to consider so.	It's overthinking it to think about it that much.

faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither with modesty enough, and likelihood to lead it: as thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander returneth into dust; the dust is earth; of earth we make loam; and why of that loam, whereto he was converted, might they not stop a beer-barrel?	No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither with modesty enough, and likelihood to lead it: as thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander returneth into dust; the dust is earth; of earth we make loam; and why of that loam, whereto he was converted, might they not stop a beer-barrel?	No, not at all; but to trace his fate with reasonable humility, and a good chance of figuring it out: like this: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander turned to dust; the dust is earth; we make clay from earth; and why couldn't that clay, which he became, be used to plug a beer barrel?

the winter flaw	Imperious Caesar, dead and turn’d to clay, Might stop a hole to keep the wind away: O, that that earth, which kept the world in awe, Should patch a wall to expel the winter flaw! But soft!	the winter wind

kept the world in awe, Should patch a wall to expel the winter flaw!	Imperious Caesar, dead and turn’d to clay, Might stop a hole to keep the wind away: O, that that earth, which kept the world in awe, Should patch a wall to expel the winter flaw! But soft!	Held the world in fear, should patch a wall to keep out the winter wind!

Imperious Caesar	Imperious Caesar, dead and turn’d to clay, Might stop a hole to keep the wind away: O, that that earth, which kept the world in awe, Should patch a wall to expel the winter flaw! But soft!	Powerful Caesar

queen, the courtiers: who is this they follow?	The queen, the courtiers: who is this they follow? And with such maimed rites?	Who is this the queen and her people are following?

such maimed rites	The queen, the courtiers: who is this they follow? And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken The corse they follow did with desperate hand Fordo its own life: ’twas of some estate.	such incomplete ceremonies

did with desperate hand Fordo its own life: ’twas of some estate.	And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken The corse they follow did with desperate hand Fordo its own life: ’twas of some estate.	killed himself: he was a person of some wealth.

desperate hand Fordo	And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken The corse they follow did with desperate hand Fordo its own life: ’twas of some estate.	a desperate hand destroyed

the last trumpet	Her obsequies have been as far enlarged As we have warranty: her death was doubtful; And, but that great command o’ersways the order, She should in ground unsanctified have lodged Till the last trumpet; for charitable prayers, Shards, flints and pebbles should be thrown on her: Yet here she is allow’d her virgin crants, Her maiden strewments and the bringing home Of bell and burial.	Judgment Day

Her maiden strewments	Her obsequies have been as far enlarged As we have warranty: her death was doubtful; And, but that great command o’ersways the order, She should in ground unsanctified have lodged Till the last trumpet; for charitable prayers, Shards, flints and pebbles should be thrown on her: Yet here she is allow’d her virgin crants, Her maiden strewments and the bringing home Of bell and burial.	Flowers scattered on her grave because she was a virgin.

crants, Her maiden strewments and the bringing home Of bell and burial.	Her obsequies have been as far enlarged As we have warranty: her death was doubtful; And, but that great command o’ersways the order, She should in ground unsanctified have lodged Till the last trumpet; for charitable prayers, Shards, flints and pebbles should be thrown on her: Yet here she is allow’d her virgin crants, Her maiden strewments and the bringing home Of bell and burial.	Wreaths, flowers scattered by virgins, and the proper funeral rites with bell tolling.

allow’d her virgin crants	Her obsequies have been as far enlarged As we have warranty: her death was doubtful; And, but that great command o’ersways the order, She should in ground unsanctified have lodged Till the last trumpet; for charitable prayers, Shards, flints and pebbles should be thrown on her: Yet here she is allow’d her virgin crants, Her maiden strewments and the bringing home Of bell and burial.	allowed her virgin wreaths

sing a requiem and such rest to her As to peace-parted souls.	No more be done: We should profane the service of the dead To sing a requiem and such rest to her As to peace-parted souls.	sing a funeral song and wish her the kind of rest given to those who die peacefully.

her fair and unpolluted flesh	Lay her i’ the earth: And from her fair and unpolluted flesh May violets spring!	her beautiful and pure body

thee, churlish priest, A ministering angel shall my sister be, When thou liest howling.	I tell thee, churlish priest, A ministering angel shall my sister be, When thou liest howling.	You rude priest, my sister will be a helpful angel when you are dead and screaming in hell.

churlish priest	I tell thee, churlish priest, A ministering angel shall my sister be, When thou liest howling.	rude priest

, the fair Ophelia	What, the fair Ophelia!	the fair Ophelia

Sweets to the sweet: farewell!	Sweets to the sweet: farewell! (Scattering flowers.)	Flowers to the lovely one: goodbye!

deck’d, sweet maid, And not have strew’d thy grave.	I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet’s wife; I thought thy bride-bed to have deck’d, sweet maid, And not have strew’d thy grave.	decorated, sweet girl, and not scattered flowers on your grave.

my Hamlet’s wife	I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet’s wife; I thought thy bride-bed to have deck’d, sweet maid, And not have strew’d thy grave.	Hamlet's wife

sweet maid	I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet’s wife; I thought thy bride-bed to have deck’d, sweet maid, And not have strew’d thy grave.	sweet girl

treble woe	O, treble woe Fall ten times treble on that cursed head, Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense Deprived thee of!	three times the sorrow

that cursed head	O, treble woe Fall ten times treble on that cursed head, Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense Deprived thee of!	that evil person

thy most ingenious sense	O, treble woe Fall ten times treble on that cursed head, Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense Deprived thee of!	your brilliant mind

Whose wicked deed	O, treble woe Fall ten times treble on that cursed head, Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense Deprived thee of!	Whose evil act

caught her once more in mine arms: (Leaps into the grave.)	Hold off the earth awhile, Till I have caught her once more in mine arms: (Leaps into the grave.)	held her in my arms again: (Jumps into the grave.)

the skyish head	Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead, Till of this flat a mountain you have made, To o’ertop old Pelion, or the skyish head Of blue Olympus.	the sky-high peak

old Pelion	Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead, Till of this flat a mountain you have made, To o’ertop old Pelion, or the skyish head Of blue Olympus.	old Pelion

pile your dust upon the quick and dead, Till of this flat a mountain you have made, To o’ertop old Pelion, or the skyish head Of blue Olympus.	Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead, Till of this flat a mountain you have made, To o’ertop old Pelion, or the skyish head Of blue Olympus.	Pile dust on the living and the dead until you've made a mountain here, taller than Mount Pelion or the peak of Mount Olympus.

the wandering stars	What is he whose grief Bears such an emphasis? whose phrase of sorrow Conjures the wandering stars, and makes them stand Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I, Hamlet the Dane.	stars that move around

stand Like wonder-wounded hearers?	What is he whose grief Bears such an emphasis? whose phrase of sorrow Conjures the wandering stars, and makes them stand Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I, Hamlet the Dane.	stop, as if shocked and listening intently?

wonder-wounded hearers	What is he whose grief Bears such an emphasis? whose phrase of sorrow Conjures the wandering stars, and makes them stand Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I, Hamlet the Dane.	listeners wounded by wonder

I, Hamlet the Dane.	whose phrase of sorrow Conjures the wandering stars, and makes them stand Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I, Hamlet the Dane. (Leaps into the grave.)	I am Hamlet, from Denmark.

Leaps into the grave.)	This is I, Hamlet the Dane. (Leaps into the grave.)	(Jumps into the grave.)

Grappling with him.)	The devil take thy soul! (Grappling with him.)	(Fighting with him.)

Thou pray’st	Thou pray’st not well.	You don't pray well.

am not splenitive and rash, Yet have I something in me dangerous, Which let thy wiseness fear: hold off thy hand.	I prithee, take thy fingers from my throat; For, though I am not splenitive and rash, Yet have I something in me dangerous, Which let thy wiseness fear: hold off thy hand.	I'm not quick to anger or impulsive, but I have a dangerous side that you should be wary of, so take your hand away.

come out of the grave.)	Good my lord, be quiet. (The Attendants part them, and they come out of the grave.)	come out of the grave.

mad, Laertes	O, he is mad, Laertes.	mad, Laertes

love of God, forbear him.	For love of God, forbear him.	For God's sake, leave him alone.

I’ll do’t.	eat a crocodile? I’ll do’t.	I'll do it.

come here to whine?	Dost thou come here to whine? To outface me with leaping in her grave?	Come here to complain?

outface me with leaping in her grave?	Dost thou come here to whine? To outface me with leaping in her grave? Be buried quick with her, and so will I: And, if thou prate of mountains, let them throw Millions of acres on us, till our ground, Singeing his pate against the burning zone, Make Ossa like a wart!	Do you try to one-up me by jumping into her grave?

prate of mountains, let them throw Millions of acres on us, till our ground, Singeing his pate against the burning zone, Make Ossa like a wart!	To outface me with leaping in her grave? Be buried quick with her, and so will I: And, if thou prate of mountains, let them throw Millions of acres on us, till our ground, Singeing his pate against the burning zone, Make Ossa like a wart! Nay, an thou’lt mouth, I’ll rant as well as thou.	If you brag about mountains, let them bury us under millions of acres of earth, until the ground burns the top of his head against the sun, and Mount Ossa looks like a tiny bump!

Nay, an thou’lt mouth, I’ll rant as well as thou.	Be buried quick with her, and so will I: And, if thou prate of mountains, let them throw Millions of acres on us, till our ground, Singeing his pate against the burning zone, Make Ossa like a wart! Nay, an thou’lt mouth, I’ll rant as well as thou.	No, if you're going to shout, I can shout just as loudly as you.

an thou’lt mouth	Be buried quick with her, and so will I: And, if thou prate of mountains, let them throw Millions of acres on us, till our ground, Singeing his pate against the burning zone, Make Ossa like a wart! Nay, an thou’lt mouth, I’ll rant as well as thou.	if you boast

the female dove	This is mere madness: And thus awhile the fit will work on him; Anon, as patient as the female dove, When that her golden couplets are disclosed, His silence will sit drooping.	a mother dove

work on him; Anon, as patient as the female dove, When that her golden couplets are disclosed, His silence will sit drooping.	This is mere madness: And thus awhile the fit will work on him; Anon, as patient as the female dove, When that her golden couplets are disclosed, His silence will sit drooping.	affect him. Soon, he'll be as calm as a mother dove watching her newborn chicks hatch, and his silence will be sad and heavy.

her golden couplets	This is mere madness: And thus awhile the fit will work on him; Anon, as patient as the female dove, When that her golden couplets are disclosed, His silence will sit drooping.	her newborn chicks

Hercules himself do what he may, The cat will mew and dog will have his day.	I loved you ever: but it is no matter; Let Hercules himself do what he may, The cat will mew and dog will have his day. (Exit.)	Even if Hercules himself tried to stop it, cats will still meow and everyone will eventually have their turn.

good Horatio	I pray you, good Horatio, wait upon him. (Exit Horatio.)	good Horatio

(Exit Horatio	I pray you, good Horatio, wait upon him. (Exit Horatio.)	)

our last night’s speech	Strengthen your patience in our last night’s speech; We’ll put the matter to the present push.	what we talked about last night

put the matter to the present push.	Strengthen your patience in our last night’s speech; We’ll put the matter to the present push.	bring the matter to a head now.

Good Gertrude	Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.	Good Gertrude

have a living monument: An hour of quiet shortly shall we see; Till then, in patience our proceeding be.	This grave shall have a living monument: An hour of quiet shortly shall we see; Till then, in patience our proceeding be. (Exeunt.)	will be a lasting memory: We'll soon have a peaceful moment; until then, let's be patient in what we do.

a living monument	This grave shall have a living monument: An hour of quiet shortly shall we see; Till then, in patience our proceeding be. (Exeunt.)	a lasting memory

much for this, sir: now shall you see the other; You do remember all the circumstance?	So much for this, sir: now shall you see the other; You do remember all the circumstance?	Okay, that's enough about this. Now you'll see the other thing. Do you remember everything that happened?

all the circumstance	So much for this, sir: now shall you see the other; You do remember all the circumstance?	all the details

Worse than the mutines in the bilboes.	Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting, That would not let me sleep: methought I lay Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly, And praised be rashness for it, let us know, Our indiscretion sometimes serves us well, When our deep plots do pall: and that should teach us There’s a divinity that shapes our ends, Rough-hew them how we will—	Worse than the rebellious prisoners in shackles.

serves us well, When our deep plots do pall: and that should teach us There’s a divinity that shapes our ends, Rough-hew them how we will—	Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting, That would not let me sleep: methought I lay Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly, And praised be rashness for it, let us know, Our indiscretion sometimes serves us well, When our deep plots do pall: and that should teach us There’s a divinity that shapes our ends, Rough-hew them how we will—	works out for us, when our careful plans fail. That should teach us that fate guides our lives, no matter how we try to shape them.

withdrew To mine own room again; making so bold,	Up from my cabin, My sea-gown scarf’d about me, in the dark Groped I to find out them; had my desire, Finger’d their packet, and in fine withdrew To mine own room again; making so bold, My fears forgetting manners, to unseal Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio— O royal knavery!—an exact command, Larded with many several sorts of reasons Importing Denmark’s health and England’s too, With, ho! such bugs and goblins in my life, That, on the supervise, no leisure bated, No, not to stay the grinding of the axe, My head should be struck off.	went back to my room; being so bold

O royal knavery!—an exact command	Up from my cabin, My sea-gown scarf’d about me, in the dark Groped I to find out them; had my desire, Finger’d their packet, and in fine withdrew To mine own room again; making so bold, My fears forgetting manners, to unseal Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio— O royal knavery!—an exact command, Larded with many several sorts of reasons Importing Denmark’s health and England’s too, With, ho! such bugs and goblins in my life, That, on the supervise, no leisure bated, No, not to stay the grinding of the axe, My head should be struck off.	Oh, what royal treachery!—a precise order

Denmark’s health	Up from my cabin, My sea-gown scarf’d about me, in the dark Groped I to find out them; had my desire, Finger’d their packet, and in fine withdrew To mine own room again; making so bold, My fears forgetting manners, to unseal Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio— O royal knavery!—an exact command, Larded with many several sorts of reasons Importing Denmark’s health and England’s too, With, ho! such bugs and goblins in my life, That, on the supervise, no leisure bated, No, not to stay the grinding of the axe, My head should be struck off.	Denmark's well-being

commission; where I found, Horatio— O royal knavery!—an exact command, Larded with many several sorts of reasons Importing Denmark’s health and England’s too, With, ho! such bugs and goblins in my life, That, on the supervise, no leisure bated, No, not to stay the grinding of the axe, My head should be struck off.	Up from my cabin, My sea-gown scarf’d about me, in the dark Groped I to find out them; had my desire, Finger’d their packet, and in fine withdrew To mine own room again; making so bold, My fears forgetting manners, to unseal Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio— O royal knavery!—an exact command, Larded with many several sorts of reasons Importing Denmark’s health and England’s too, With, ho! such bugs and goblins in my life, That, on the supervise, no leisure bated, No, not to stay the grinding of the axe, My head should be struck off.	official order; where I found, Horatio— Oh, what royal treachery!—a precise order, filled with all sorts of reasons claiming it was for the good of both Denmark and England, and, get this! such threats and imagined dangers about my life, that, upon inspection, without any delay, not even enough time to sharpen the axe, my head should be chopped off.

baseness to write fair and labour’d much How to forget that learning, but, sir, now It did me yeoman’s service: wilt thou know The effect of what I wrote?	Being thus be-netted round with villainies— Ere I could make a prologue to my brains, They had begun the play—I sat me down, Devised a new commission, wrote it fair: I once did hold it, as our statists do, A baseness to write fair and labour’d much How to forget that learning, but, sir, now It did me yeoman’s service: wilt thou know The effect of what I wrote?	considered good handwriting low class and tried hard to unlearn it, but now it proved very useful. Do you want to know what I wrote?

me yeoman’s service	Being thus be-netted round with villainies— Ere I could make a prologue to my brains, They had begun the play—I sat me down, Devised a new commission, wrote it fair: I once did hold it, as our statists do, A baseness to write fair and labour’d much How to forget that learning, but, sir, now It did me yeoman’s service: wilt thou know The effect of what I wrote?	helped me greatly

many such-like “As”es	An earnest conjuration from the king, As England was his faithful tributary, As love between them like the palm might flourish, As peace should still her wheaten garland wear And stand a comma ’tween their amities, And many such-like “As”es of great charge, That, on the view and knowing of these contents, Without debatement further, more or less, He should the bearers put to sudden death, Not shriving-time allow’d.	many similar demands

her wheaten garland	An earnest conjuration from the king, As England was his faithful tributary, As love between them like the palm might flourish, As peace should still her wheaten garland wear And stand a comma ’tween their amities, And many such-like “As”es of great charge, That, on the view and knowing of these contents, Without debatement further, more or less, He should the bearers put to sudden death, Not shriving-time allow’d.	her garland of wheat

knowing of these contents, Without debatement further, more or less, He should the bearers put to sudden death, Not shriving-time allow’d.	An earnest conjuration from the king, As England was his faithful tributary, As love between them like the palm might flourish, As peace should still her wheaten garland wear And stand a comma ’tween their amities, And many such-like “As”es of great charge, That, on the view and knowing of these contents, Without debatement further, more or less, He should the bearers put to sudden death, Not shriving-time allow’d.	After understanding these orders, he should immediately execute the messengers without any discussion or delay, and without allowing them time for confession.

An earnest conjuration	An earnest conjuration from the king, As England was his faithful tributary, As love between them like the palm might flourish, As peace should still her wheaten garland wear And stand a comma ’tween their amities, And many such-like “As”es of great charge, That, on the view and knowing of these contents, Without debatement further, more or less, He should the bearers put to sudden death, Not shriving-time allow’d.	A serious and urgent request.

his faithful tributary	An earnest conjuration from the king, As England was his faithful tributary, As love between them like the palm might flourish, As peace should still her wheaten garland wear And stand a comma ’tween their amities, And many such-like “As”es of great charge, That, on the view and knowing of these contents, Without debatement further, more or less, He should the bearers put to sudden death, Not shriving-time allow’d.	his loyal subject

a comma ’tween	An earnest conjuration from the king, As England was his faithful tributary, As love between them like the palm might flourish, As peace should still her wheaten garland wear And stand a comma ’tween their amities, And many such-like “As”es of great charge, That, on the view and knowing of these contents, Without debatement further, more or less, He should the bearers put to sudden death, Not shriving-time allow’d.	a pause between

heaven ordinant	Why, even in that was heaven ordinant. I had my father’s signet in my purse, Which was the model of that Danish seal; Folded the writ up in form of the other, Subscribed it, gave’t the impression, placed it safely, The changeling never known.	heaven ordained it

was heaven ordinant.	Why, even in that was heaven ordinant. I had my father’s signet in my purse, Which was the model of that Danish seal; Folded the writ up in form of the other, Subscribed it, gave’t the impression, placed it safely, The changeling never known.	Heaven ordained it.

my father’s signet	Why, even in that was heaven ordinant. I had my father’s signet in my purse, Which was the model of that Danish seal; Folded the writ up in form of the other, Subscribed it, gave’t the impression, placed it safely, The changeling never known. Now, the next day Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent Thou know’st already.	my father's seal

had my father’s signet in my purse, Which was the model of that Danish seal; Folded the writ up in form of the other, Subscribed it, gave’t the impression, placed it safely, The changeling never known.	Why, even in that was heaven ordinant. I had my father’s signet in my purse, Which was the model of that Danish seal; Folded the writ up in form of the other, Subscribed it, gave’t the impression, placed it safely, The changeling never known. Now, the next day Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent Thou know’st already.	I had my father's signet ring in my purse, which was an exact copy of the Danish seal. I folded the letter to look like the other one, signed it, stamped it with the seal, and put it back without anyone knowing the difference.

sequent Thou know’st	I had my father’s signet in my purse, Which was the model of that Danish seal; Folded the writ up in form of the other, Subscribed it, gave’t the impression, placed it safely, The changeling never known. Now, the next day Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent Thou know’st already.	you know what happened next

what to this was sequent Thou know’st already.	I had my father’s signet in my purse, Which was the model of that Danish seal; Folded the writ up in form of the other, Subscribed it, gave’t the impression, placed it safely, The changeling never known. Now, the next day Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent Thou know’st already.	You already know what happened after that.

are not near my conscience; their defeat Does by their own insinuation grow: ’Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes Between the pass and fell incensed points Of mighty opposites.	Why, man, they did make love to this employment; They are not near my conscience; their defeat Does by their own insinuation grow: ’Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes Between the pass and fell incensed points Of mighty opposites.	Don't bother my conscience; they brought their defeat on themselves. It's dangerous when someone low tries to interfere in a fight between powerful enemies.

incensed points	Why, man, they did make love to this employment; They are not near my conscience; their defeat Does by their own insinuation grow: ’Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes Between the pass and fell incensed points Of mighty opposites.	angry weapons

the baser nature	Why, man, they did make love to this employment; They are not near my conscience; their defeat Does by their own insinuation grow: ’Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes Between the pass and fell incensed points Of mighty opposites.	A lower sort of person

their own insinuation	Why, man, they did make love to this employment; They are not near my conscience; their defeat Does by their own insinuation grow: ’Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes Between the pass and fell incensed points Of mighty opposites.	their own meddling

not perfect conscience	Does it not, think’st thee, stand me now upon— He that hath kill’d my king and whored my mother, Popp’d in between the election and my hopes, Thrown out his angle for my proper life, And with such cozenage—is’t not perfect conscience, To quit him with this arm? and is’t not to be damn’d, To let this canker of our nature come In further evil?	not completely right

canker of our nature come In further evil?	Does it not, think’st thee, stand me now upon— He that hath kill’d my king and whored my mother, Popp’d in between the election and my hopes, Thrown out his angle for my proper life, And with such cozenage—is’t not perfect conscience, To quit him with this arm? and is’t not to be damn’d, To let this canker of our nature come In further evil?	this corruption of human nature cause more harm?

such cozenage	Does it not, think’st thee, stand me now upon— He that hath kill’d my king and whored my mother, Popp’d in between the election and my hopes, Thrown out his angle for my proper life, And with such cozenage—is’t not perfect conscience, To quit him with this arm? and is’t not to be damn’d, To let this canker of our nature come In further evil?	such trickery

known to him from England What is the issue of the business there.	It must be shortly known to him from England What is the issue of the business there.	He should quickly find out from England how things turned out there.

a man’s life	It will be short: the interim is mine; And a man’s life’s no more than to say “One.” But I am very sorry, good Horatio, That to Laertes I forgot myself;	a man's life

, good Horatio	It will be short: the interim is mine; And a man’s life’s no more than to say “One.” But I am very sorry, good Horatio, That to Laertes I forgot myself; For, by the image of my cause, I see The portraiture of his: I’ll court his favours: But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me Into a towering passion.	, my good Horatio

Horatio, That to Laertes I forgot myself;	It will be short: the interim is mine; And a man’s life’s no more than to say “One.” But I am very sorry, good Horatio, That to Laertes I forgot myself; For, by the image of my cause, I see The portraiture of his: I’ll court his favours: But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me Into a towering passion.	Horatio, I behaved wrongly towards Laertes;

portraiture of his: I’ll court his favours: But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me Into a towering passion.	But I am very sorry, good Horatio, That to Laertes I forgot myself; For, by the image of my cause, I see The portraiture of his: I’ll court his favours: But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me Into a towering passion.	his situation mirrors mine. I'll seek his forgiveness. But honestly, the showiness of his grief made me extremely angry.

lord of beasts, and his crib shall stand at the king’s mess: ’tis a chough; but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.	Thy state is the more gracious; for ’tis a vice to know him. He hath much land, and fertile: let a beast be lord of beasts, and his crib shall stand at the king’s mess: ’tis a chough; but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.	He's a master of animals, and his feeding trough deserves to be at the king's table. He's a lowborn fellow, but, as I said, owns a lot of land.

the king’s mess	Thy state is the more gracious; for ’tis a vice to know him. He hath much land, and fertile: let a beast be lord of beasts, and his crib shall stand at the king’s mess: ’tis a chough; but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.	the king's table

impart a thing to you from his majesty.	Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, I should impart a thing to you from his majesty.	share something with you from the king.

receive it, sir, with all diligence of spirit.	I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use; ’tis for the head.	I will receive it, sir, with great enthusiasm.

tis for the head.	I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use; ’tis for the head.	It's for your head.

is very sultry and hot for my complexion.	But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for my complexion.	It's very hot and humid for my skin.

twere—I cannot tell how.	Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry—as ’twere—I cannot tell how. But, my lord, his majesty bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager on your head: sir, this is the matter—	I can't explain it.

a great wager	Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry—as ’twere—I cannot tell how. But, my lord, his majesty bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager on your head: sir, this is the matter—	a big bet

laid a great wager on your head: sir, this is the matter—	Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry—as ’twere—I cannot tell how. But, my lord, his majesty bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager on your head: sir, this is the matter—	placed a big bet on you. That's the situation.

gentleman, full of most excellent differences, of very soft society and great showing: indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the continent of what part a gentleman would see.	Nay, good my lord; for mine ease, in good faith. Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes; believe me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent differences, of very soft society and great showing: indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the continent of what part a gentleman would see.	a gentleman with many outstanding qualities, very sociable and impressive. In fact, to describe him accurately, he's a perfect model of a gentleman; you'll find he embodies everything a gentleman should be.

court Laertes	Nay, good my lord; for mine ease, in good faith. Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes; believe me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent differences, of very soft society and great showing: indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the continent of what part a gentleman would see.	Laertes is at court

suffers no perdition in you; though, I know, to divide him inventorially would dizzy the arithmetic of memory, and yet but yaw	Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you; though, I know, to divide him inventorially would dizzy the arithmetic of memory, and yet but yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail.	You understand him perfectly; though listing all his qualities would overwhelm the most detailed memory, and still barely scratch the surface.

respect of his quick sail.	Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you; though, I know, to divide him inventorially would dizzy the arithmetic of memory, and yet but yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great article; and his infusion of such dearth and rareness, as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his mirror; and who else would trace him, his umbrage, nothing more.	compared to how fast he is.

verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great article; and his infusion of such dearth and rareness, as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his mirror; and who else would trace him, his umbrage, nothing more.	neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great article; and his infusion of such dearth and rareness, as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his mirror; and who else would trace him, his umbrage, nothing more.	In truth, I consider him a person of great importance; he is so rare and unique that the only way to truly describe him is to say he's like his own reflection. Anyone else who tries to emulate him is just a shadow, nothing more.

such dearth	neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great article; and his infusion of such dearth and rareness, as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his mirror; and who else would trace him, his umbrage, nothing more.	such rarity

true diction	neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great article; and his infusion of such dearth and rareness, as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his mirror; and who else would trace him, his umbrage, nothing more.	accurate description

infallibly of him.	Your lordship speaks most infallibly of him.	certainly about him.

concernancy, sir?	The concernancy, sir? why do we wrap the gentleman in our more rawer breath?	What's it to you, sir?

do’t, sir, really.	Is’t not possible to understand in another tongue? You will do’t, sir, really.	Do it, sir, really.

all’s golden words	His purse is empty already; all’s golden words are spent.	He's run out of eloquent promises.

ignorant of what excellence Laertes is—	You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is—	You know how talented Laertes is.

compare with him in excellence; but, to know a man well, were to know himself.	I dare not confess that, lest I should compare with him in excellence; but, to know a man well, were to know himself.	I wouldn't want to seem like I'm trying to be as good as him, but to really know someone is to know yourself.

laid on him by them, in his meed he’s unfellowed.	I mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation laid on him by them, in his meed he’s unfellowed.	regarding what they accuse him of, he's unmatched in his reward.

most delicate carriages	The king, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary horses: against the which he has imponed, as I take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so: three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of very liberal conceit.	very finely crafted holders

six French rapiers	The king, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary horses: against the which he has imponed, as I take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so: three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of very liberal conceit.	six French swords

six Barbary horses	The king, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary horses: against the which he has imponed, as I take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so: three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of very liberal conceit.	Six Barbary horses.

very liberal conceit	The king, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary horses: against the which he has imponed, as I take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so: three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of very liberal conceit.	very elaborate design

wagered with him six Barbary horses: against the which he has imponed, as I take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so: three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of very liberal conceit.	The king, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary horses: against the which he has imponed, as I take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so: three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of very liberal conceit.	bet him six Barbary horses; in return for which he's put up, I believe, six French rapiers and daggers, with all their accessories, like belts and hangers. Three of the scabbards, truly, are exquisitely crafted, perfectly matched to the hilts, extremely refined, and very creatively designed.

carriages, sir, are the hangers.	The carriages, sir, are the hangers.	Carriages, sir, are the hangers.

be more german to the matter, if we could carry cannon by our sides: I would it might be hangers till then.	The phrase would be more german to the matter, if we could carry cannon by our sides: I would it might be hangers till then. But, on: six Barbary horses against six French swords, their assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages; that’s the French bet against the Danish.	would be more relevant if we could carry cannons. I wish we had swords in the meantime.

three liberal-conceited carriages	The phrase would be more german to the matter, if we could carry cannon by our sides: I would it might be hangers till then. But, on: six Barbary horses against six French swords, their assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages; that’s the French bet against the Danish. Why is this “imponed,” as you call it?	three fancy carriages

horses against six French swords, their assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages; that’s the French bet against the Danish.	The phrase would be more german to the matter, if we could carry cannon by our sides: I would it might be hangers till then. But, on: six Barbary horses against six French swords, their assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages; that’s the French bet against the Danish. Why is this “imponed,” as you call it?	horses, their equipment, and three fancy carriages; that's the French bet against the Danish.

six Barbary horses	The phrase would be more german to the matter, if we could carry cannon by our sides: I would it might be hangers till then. But, on: six Barbary horses against six French swords, their assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages; that’s the French bet against the Danish. Why is this “imponed,” as you call it?	six Barbary horses

laid on twelve for nine; and it would come to immediate trial, if your lordship would vouchsafe the answer.	The king, sir, hath laid, that in a dozen passes between yourself and him, he shall not exceed you three hits: he hath laid on twelve for nine; and it would come to immediate trial, if your lordship would vouchsafe the answer.	bet twelve to nine; and it would start right away if you'd give your answer.

lord, the opposition of your person in trial.	I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.	My lord, that you are on trial.

nothing but my shame and the odd hits.	Sir, I will walk here in the hall: if it please his majesty, ’tis the breathing time of day with me; let the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the king hold his purpose, I will win for him an I can; if not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd hits.	only my embarrassment and a few accidental hits.

sir; after what flourish your nature will.	To this effect, sir; after what flourish your nature will.	sir, however your personality allows.

commend my duty to your lordship.	I commend my duty to your lordship.	I offer my respects to you.

(Exit Osric	Yours, yours. (Exit Osric.) He does well to commend it himself; there are no tongues else for’s turn.	)

are no tongues else for’s turn.	(Exit Osric.) He does well to commend it himself; there are no tongues else for’s turn.	No one else will praise him.

comply with his dug, before he sucked it.	He did comply with his dug, before he sucked it. Thus has he—and many more of the same bevy that I know the drossy age dotes on—only got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter; a kind of yesty collection, which carries them through and through the most fond and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to their trial, the bubbles are out.	agreed to suckle before he actually did.

outward habit	He did comply with his dug, before he sucked it. Thus has he—and many more of the same bevy that I know the drossy age dotes on—only got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter; a kind of yesty collection, which carries them through and through the most fond and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to their trial, the bubbles are out.	outward appearance

kind of yesty collection, which carries them through and through the most fond and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to their trial, the bubbles are out.	He did comply with his dug, before he sucked it. Thus has he—and many more of the same bevy that I know the drossy age dotes on—only got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter; a kind of yesty collection, which carries them through and through the most fond and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to their trial, the bubbles are out.	They're like a frothy mix that lets them fake their way through even the most cherished and carefully considered ideas; but if you put them to the test, their shallowness is exposed.

the most fond and winnowed opinions	He did comply with his dug, before he sucked it. Thus has he—and many more of the same bevy that I know the drossy age dotes on—only got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter; a kind of yesty collection, which carries them through and through the most fond and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to their trial, the bubbles are out.	the most cherished and carefully considered ideas

yesty collection	He did comply with his dug, before he sucked it. Thus has he—and many more of the same bevy that I know the drossy age dotes on—only got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter; a kind of yesty collection, which carries them through and through the most fond and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to their trial, the bubbles are out.	frothy mixture

the drossy age	He did comply with his dug, before he sucked it. Thus has he—and many more of the same bevy that I know the drossy age dotes on—only got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter; a kind of yesty collection, which carries them through and through the most fond and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to their trial, the bubbles are out.	the worthless generation

the same bevy	He did comply with his dug, before he sucked it. Thus has he—and many more of the same bevy that I know the drossy age dotes on—only got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter; a kind of yesty collection, which carries them through and through the most fond and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to their trial, the bubbles are out.	the same group

young Osric	My lord, his majesty commended him to you by young Osric, who brings back to him that you attend him in the hall: he sends to know if your pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will take longer time.	young Osric

Osric, who brings back to him that you attend him in the hall: he sends to know if your pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will take longer time.	My lord, his majesty commended him to you by young Osric, who brings back to him that you attend him in the hall: he sends to know if your pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will take longer time.	Osric is here to tell you the king wants you in the hall. He wants to know if you still want to fence with Laertes, or if you need more time.

is ready; now or whensoever, provided I be so able as now.	I am constant to my purpose; they follow the king’s pleasure: if his fitness speaks, mine is ready; now or whensoever, provided I be so able as now.	is ready; now or whenever, as long as I'm as capable as I am now.

the king’s pleasure	I am constant to my purpose; they follow the king’s pleasure: if his fitness speaks, mine is ready; now or whensoever, provided I be so able as now.	what the king wants

use some gentle entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play.	The queen desires you to use some gentle entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play.	Be friendly and engaging with Laertes before you start the duel.

went into France, I have been in continual practice: I shall win at the odds.	I do not think so: since he went into France, I have been in continual practice: I shall win at the odds. But thou wouldst not think how ill all’s here about my heart: but it is no matter.	gone to France, I've been practicing constantly: I'm sure to win.

continual practice	I do not think so: since he went into France, I have been in continual practice: I shall win at the odds. But thou wouldst not think how ill all’s here about my heart: but it is no matter.	constant practice

here about my heart: but it is no matter.	I do not think so: since he went into France, I have been in continual practice: I shall win at the odds. But thou wouldst not think how ill all’s here about my heart: but it is no matter.	Here in my heart, but it doesn't matter.

kind of gain-giving, as would perhaps trouble a woman.	It is but foolery; but it is such a kind of gain-giving, as would perhaps trouble a woman.	a feeling that might upset a woman.

obey it: I will forestall their repair hither, and say you are not fit.	If your mind dislike any thing, obey it: I will forestall their repair hither, and say you are not fit.	Listen to it. I will prevent them from coming here and say you are not well.

providence in the fall of a sparrow.	Not a whit, we defy augury: there’s a special providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, ’tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be now; if it be not now, yet it will come: the readiness is all: since no man has aught of what he leaves, what is’t to leave betimes?	God has a plan, even for something as small as a sparrow dying.

aught of what he leaves, what is’t to leave betimes?	Not a whit, we defy augury: there’s a special providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, ’tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be now; if it be not now, yet it will come: the readiness is all: since no man has aught of what he leaves, what is’t to leave betimes?	anything he leaves behind, so what does it matter to die early?

needs have heard, how I am punish’d With sore distraction.	Give me your pardon, sir: I’ve done you wrong; But pardon’t, as you are a gentleman. This presence knows, And you must needs have heard, how I am punish’d With sore distraction. What I have done, That might your nature, honour and exception Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.	must have heard how I'm suffering terribly.

sore distraction	Give me your pardon, sir: I’ve done you wrong; But pardon’t, as you are a gentleman. This presence knows, And you must needs have heard, how I am punish’d With sore distraction. What I have done, That might your nature, honour and exception Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.	terrible distress

Was’t Hamlet wrong’d Laertes	What I have done, That might your nature, honour and exception Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness. Was’t Hamlet wrong’d Laertes? Never Hamlet: If Hamlet from himself be ta’en away, And when he’s not himself does wrong Laertes, Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it.	Did Hamlet wrong Laertes?

wrong Laertes	Was’t Hamlet wrong’d Laertes? Never Hamlet: If Hamlet from himself be ta’en away, And when he’s not himself does wrong Laertes, Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it. Who does it, then?	hurt Laertes

Hamlet from himself be ta’en away, And when he’s not himself does wrong Laertes, Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it.	Was’t Hamlet wrong’d Laertes? Never Hamlet: If Hamlet from himself be ta’en away, And when he’s not himself does wrong Laertes, Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it. Who does it, then?	If Hamlet is not in his right mind and harms Laertes, then it's not really Hamlet doing it, and he denies responsibility.

madness: if’t be so, Hamlet is of the faction that is wrong’d;	Who does it, then? His madness: if’t be so, Hamlet is of the faction that is wrong’d; His madness is poor Hamlet’s enemy.	madness: if that's the case, Hamlet is on the side that's been hurt.

poor Hamlet’s enemy	His madness: if’t be so, Hamlet is of the faction that is wrong’d; His madness is poor Hamlet’s enemy. Sir, in this audience, Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil Free me so far in your most generous thoughts, That I have shot mine arrow o’er the house, And hurt my brother.	Hamlet's madness

Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil Free me so far in your most generous thoughts, That I have shot mine arrow o’er the house, And hurt my brother.	His madness is poor Hamlet’s enemy. Sir, in this audience, Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil Free me so far in your most generous thoughts, That I have shot mine arrow o’er the house, And hurt my brother.	Let my denial of any intended harm convince you that I mistakenly hurt someone I care about.

terms of honour I stand aloof; and will no reconcilement, Till by some elder masters, of known honour, I have a voice and precedent of peace, To keep my name ungored.	I am satisfied in nature, Whose motive, in this case, should stir me most To my revenge: but in my terms of honour I stand aloof; and will no reconcilement, Till by some elder masters, of known honour, I have a voice and precedent of peace, To keep my name ungored. But till that time, I do receive your offer’d love like love, And will not wrong it.	As far as honor is concerned, I'm staying away from reconciliation until respected elders give their approval and set a peaceful example, so my reputation remains untarnished.

will no reconcilement	I am satisfied in nature, Whose motive, in this case, should stir me most To my revenge: but in my terms of honour I stand aloof; and will no reconcilement, Till by some elder masters, of known honour, I have a voice and precedent of peace, To keep my name ungored. But till that time, I do receive your offer’d love like love, And will not wrong it.	I refuse any reconciliation.

some elder masters	I am satisfied in nature, Whose motive, in this case, should stir me most To my revenge: but in my terms of honour I stand aloof; and will no reconcilement, Till by some elder masters, of known honour, I have a voice and precedent of peace, To keep my name ungored. But till that time, I do receive your offer’d love like love, And will not wrong it.	respected elders

known honour	I am satisfied in nature, Whose motive, in this case, should stir me most To my revenge: but in my terms of honour I stand aloof; and will no reconcilement, Till by some elder masters, of known honour, I have a voice and precedent of peace, To keep my name ungored. But till that time, I do receive your offer’d love like love, And will not wrong it.	Reputation for honor

receive your offer’d love like love, And will not wrong it.	I am satisfied in nature, Whose motive, in this case, should stir me most To my revenge: but in my terms of honour I stand aloof; and will no reconcilement, Till by some elder masters, of known honour, I have a voice and precedent of peace, To keep my name ungored. But till that time, I do receive your offer’d love like love, And will not wrong it.	I accept your friendship as genuine and won't betray it.

your offer’d love	I am satisfied in nature, Whose motive, in this case, should stir me most To my revenge: but in my terms of honour I stand aloof; and will no reconcilement, Till by some elder masters, of known honour, I have a voice and precedent of peace, To keep my name ungored. But till that time, I do receive your offer’d love like love, And will not wrong it.	the love you're offering

this brother’s wager	I embrace it freely; And will this brother’s wager frankly play. Give us the foils.	this bet between brothers

be your foil, Laertes: in mine ignorance Your skill shall, like a star i’ the darkest night, Stick fiery off indeed.	I’ll be your foil, Laertes: in mine ignorance Your skill shall, like a star i’ the darkest night, Stick fiery off indeed.	I'll be your background, Laertes: because of my lack of skill, your skill will shine brilliantly, like a star in the darkest night.

mine ignorance	I’ll be your foil, Laertes: in mine ignorance Your skill shall, like a star i’ the darkest night, Stick fiery off indeed.	my lack of skill

young Osric	Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet, You know the wager?	young Osric

foils, young Osric.	Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet, You know the wager?	Foils, young Osric.

you both: But since he is better’d, we have therefore odds.	I do not fear it; I have seen you both: But since he is better’d, we have therefore odds.	You two: But since he's improved, we now have the advantage.

Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.	Set me the stoups of wine upon that table. If Hamlet give the first or second hit, Or quit in answer of the third exchange, Let all the battlements their ordnance fire; The king shall drink to Hamlet’s better breath; And in the cup an union shall he throw, Richer than that which four successive kings In Denmark’s crown have worn.	Put the wine bottles on the table.

battlements their ordnance fire; The king shall drink to Hamlet’s better breath; And in the cup an union shall he throw, Richer than that which four successive kings In Denmark’s crown have worn.	Set me the stoups of wine upon that table. If Hamlet give the first or second hit, Or quit in answer of the third exchange, Let all the battlements their ordnance fire; The king shall drink to Hamlet’s better breath; And in the cup an union shall he throw, Richer than that which four successive kings In Denmark’s crown have worn. Give me the cups; And let the kettle to the trumpet speak, The trumpet to the cannoneer without, The cannons to the heavens, the heavens to earth, “Now the king drinks to Hamlet.”	The cannons on the walls should fire. The king will drink to Hamlet's good health, and he'll drop a pearl into the cup, a pearl more valuable than the ones four kings of Denmark have worn in their crowns.

the first or second hit	Set me the stoups of wine upon that table. If Hamlet give the first or second hit, Or quit in answer of the third exchange, Let all the battlements their ordnance fire; The king shall drink to Hamlet’s better breath; And in the cup an union shall he throw, Richer than that which four successive kings In Denmark’s crown have worn. Give me the cups; And let the kettle to the trumpet speak, The trumpet to the cannoneer without, The cannons to the heavens, the heavens to earth, “Now the king drinks to Hamlet.”	the first or second hit

which four successive kings	Set me the stoups of wine upon that table. If Hamlet give the first or second hit, Or quit in answer of the third exchange, Let all the battlements their ordnance fire; The king shall drink to Hamlet’s better breath; And in the cup an union shall he throw, Richer than that which four successive kings In Denmark’s crown have worn. Give me the cups; And let the kettle to the trumpet speak, The trumpet to the cannoneer without, The cannons to the heavens, the heavens to earth, “Now the king drinks to Hamlet.”	that four kings in a row

their ordnance fire	Set me the stoups of wine upon that table. If Hamlet give the first or second hit, Or quit in answer of the third exchange, Let all the battlements their ordnance fire; The king shall drink to Hamlet’s better breath; And in the cup an union shall he throw, Richer than that which four successive kings In Denmark’s crown have worn. Give me the cups; And let the kettle to the trumpet speak, The trumpet to the cannoneer without, The cannons to the heavens, the heavens to earth, “Now the king drinks to Hamlet.”	their cannons fire

Hamlet’s better breath	Set me the stoups of wine upon that table. If Hamlet give the first or second hit, Or quit in answer of the third exchange, Let all the battlements their ordnance fire; The king shall drink to Hamlet’s better breath; And in the cup an union shall he throw, Richer than that which four successive kings In Denmark’s crown have worn. Give me the cups; And let the kettle to the trumpet speak, The trumpet to the cannoneer without, The cannons to the heavens, the heavens to earth, “Now the king drinks to Hamlet.”	Hamlet's good health

Denmark’s crown	Set me the stoups of wine upon that table. If Hamlet give the first or second hit, Or quit in answer of the third exchange, Let all the battlements their ordnance fire; The king shall drink to Hamlet’s better breath; And in the cup an union shall he throw, Richer than that which four successive kings In Denmark’s crown have worn. Give me the cups; And let the kettle to the trumpet speak, The trumpet to the cannoneer without, The cannons to the heavens, the heavens to earth, “Now the king drinks to Hamlet.”	The crown of Denmark

all the battlements	Set me the stoups of wine upon that table. If Hamlet give the first or second hit, Or quit in answer of the third exchange, Let all the battlements their ordnance fire; The king shall drink to Hamlet’s better breath; And in the cup an union shall he throw, Richer than that which four successive kings In Denmark’s crown have worn. Give me the cups; And let the kettle to the trumpet speak, The trumpet to the cannoneer without, The cannons to the heavens, the heavens to earth, “Now the king drinks to Hamlet.”	the castle walls

let the kettle to the trumpet speak, The trumpet to the cannoneer without, The cannons to the heavens, the heavens to earth, “Now the king drinks to Hamlet.”	If Hamlet give the first or second hit, Or quit in answer of the third exchange, Let all the battlements their ordnance fire; The king shall drink to Hamlet’s better breath; And in the cup an union shall he throw, Richer than that which four successive kings In Denmark’s crown have worn. Give me the cups; And let the kettle to the trumpet speak, The trumpet to the cannoneer without, The cannons to the heavens, the heavens to earth, “Now the king drinks to Hamlet.” Come, begin:	let the drums tell the trumpets, the trumpets tell the cannon operator outside, the cannons tell the sky, and the sky tell the earth, "The king is drinking to Hamlet!"

a wary eye	Come, begin: And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.	pay close attention

hit, a very palpable hit.	A hit, a very palpable hit.	hit, a very obvious hit.

a very palpable hit	A hit, a very palpable hit.	a very obvious hit

’s to thy health.	Stay; give me drink. Hamlet, this pearl is thine; Here’s to thy health. (Trumpets sound, and cannon shot off within.)	To your health.

set it by awhile.	I’ll play this bout first; set it by awhile. Come.	put it aside for now.

touch, a touch, I do confess.	A touch, a touch, I do confess.	Touch, a touch, I admit it.

scant of breath.	He’s fat, and scant of breath. Here, Hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows: The queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.	out of breath

carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.	He’s fat, and scant of breath. Here, Hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows: The queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.	The queen is drinking to your good luck, Hamlet.

Good madam	Good madam!	Good madam

the poison’d cup	(Aside.) It is the poison’d cup: it is too late.	the poisoned cup

drink yet, madam; by and by.	I dare not drink yet, madam; by and by.	Not yet, madam; later.

tis almost ’gainst my conscience.	(Aside.) And yet ’tis almost ’gainst my conscience.	It's almost against my conscience.

And yet ’tis	(Aside.) And yet ’tis almost ’gainst my conscience.	And yet it is

wanton of me.	Come, for the third, Laertes: you but dally; I pray you, pass with your best violence; I am afeard you make a wanton of me.	You're treating me like a baby.

, Laertes	Come, for the third, Laertes: you but dally; I pray you, pass with your best violence; I am afeard you make a wanton of me.	Laertes

Hamlet wounds Laertes	Have at you now! (Laertes wounds Hamlet; then, in scuffling, they change rapiers, and Hamlet wounds Laertes.)	Hamlet wounds Laertes

(Laertes wounds Hamlet	Have at you now! (Laertes wounds Hamlet; then, in scuffling, they change rapiers, and Hamlet wounds Laertes.)	Laertes wounds Hamlet.

change rapiers, and Hamlet wounds Laertes.)	Have at you now! (Laertes wounds Hamlet; then, in scuffling, they change rapiers, and Hamlet wounds Laertes.)	They switch swords, and Hamlet wounds Laertes.

bleed on both sides.	They bleed on both sides. How is it, my lord?	They're bleeding on both sides.

How is’t, Laertes	How is’t, Laertes?	How are you, Laertes?

mine own springe	Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric; I am justly kill’d with mine own treachery.	my own trap

mine own treachery	Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric; I am justly kill’d with mine own treachery.	my own trickery

woodcock to mine own springe, Osric; I am justly kill’d with mine own treachery.	Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric; I am justly kill’d with mine own treachery.	Like a woodcock caught in my own trap, Osric; I deserve to die because of my own deceit.

drink—O my dear Hamlet— The drink, the drink!	No, no, the drink, the drink—O my dear Hamlet— The drink, the drink! I am poison’d.	The drink—oh, my dear Hamlet—the drink, the drink!

O my dear Hamlet	No, no, the drink, the drink—O my dear Hamlet— The drink, the drink! I am poison’d.	Oh, my dear Hamlet.

O villany	O villany! Ho! let the door be lock’d: Treachery!	O villain!

lock’d: Treachery!	O villany! Ho! let the door be lock’d: Treachery! Seek it out.	Locked: Betrayal! Look for it.

art slain	It is here, Hamlet: Hamlet, thou art slain; No medicine in the world can do thee good; In thee there is not half an hour of life; The treacherous instrument is in thy hand, Unbated and envenom’d: the foul practice Hath turn’d itself on me; lo, here I lie, Never to rise again: thy mother’s poison’d: I can no more: the king, the king’s to blame.	are dead

hour of life; The treacherous instrument is in thy hand, Unbated and envenom’d: the foul practice Hath turn’d itself on me; lo, here I lie, Never to rise again: thy mother’s poison’d: I can no more: the king, the king’s to blame.	It is here, Hamlet: Hamlet, thou art slain; No medicine in the world can do thee good; In thee there is not half an hour of life; The treacherous instrument is in thy hand, Unbated and envenom’d: the foul practice Hath turn’d itself on me; lo, here I lie, Never to rise again: thy mother’s poison’d: I can no more: the king, the king’s to blame.	hour to live. The poisoned, unblunted sword is in your hand. The evil scheme has backfired on me. Look, I'm dying, never to get up again. Your mother's been poisoned. I'm finished. The king is to blame.

thy mother’s poison’d	It is here, Hamlet: Hamlet, thou art slain; No medicine in the world can do thee good; In thee there is not half an hour of life; The treacherous instrument is in thy hand, Unbated and envenom’d: the foul practice Hath turn’d itself on me; lo, here I lie, Never to rise again: thy mother’s poison’d: I can no more: the king, the king’s to blame.	Your mother's been poisoned.

The treacherous instrument	It is here, Hamlet: Hamlet, thou art slain; No medicine in the world can do thee good; In thee there is not half an hour of life; The treacherous instrument is in thy hand, Unbated and envenom’d: the foul practice Hath turn’d itself on me; lo, here I lie, Never to rise again: thy mother’s poison’d: I can no more: the king, the king’s to blame.	The poisoned sword

venom, to thy work.	The point envenom’d too! Then, venom, to thy work. (Stabs the King.)	Poison, do your job.

Then, venom	The point envenom’d too! Then, venom, to thy work. (Stabs the King.)	Then, poison

incestuous, murderous, damned Dane	Here, thou incestuous, murderous, damned Dane, Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?	You incestuous, murderous, cursed Dane.

Drink off this potion.	Here, thou incestuous, murderous, damned Dane, Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?	Drink this poison.

is a poison temper’d by himself.	He is justly served; It is a poison temper’d by himself. Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet:	He poisoned himself with his own scheme.

a poison temper’d	He is justly served; It is a poison temper’d by himself. Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet:	a poison he made himself

Exchange forgiveness	He is justly served; It is a poison temper’d by himself. Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet: Mine and my father’s death come not upon thee, Nor thine on me!	Forgive me, and I forgive you.

noble Hamlet	He is justly served; It is a poison temper’d by himself. Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet: Mine and my father’s death come not upon thee, Nor thine on me!	noble Hamlet

forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet:	He is justly served; It is a poison temper’d by himself. Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet: Mine and my father’s death come not upon thee, Nor thine on me!	Forgive me, noble Hamlet.

my father’s death	Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet: Mine and my father’s death come not upon thee, Nor thine on me! (Dies.)	my father's death

come not upon thee, Nor thine on me!	Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet: Mine and my father’s death come not upon thee, Nor thine on me! (Dies.)	May my father's and my death not be your fault, and may your death not be my fault!

Wretched queen	I am dead, Horatio. Wretched queen, adieu! You that look pale and tremble at this chance, That are but mutes or audience to this act, Had I but time—as this fell sergeant, death, Is strict in his arrest—O, I could tell you— But let it be.	Poor queen.

queen, adieu!	I am dead, Horatio. Wretched queen, adieu! You that look pale and tremble at this chance, That are but mutes or audience to this act, Had I but time—as this fell sergeant, death, Is strict in his arrest—O, I could tell you— But let it be.	Goodbye, Queen!

Is strict in his arrest—O, I could tell you— But let it be.	Wretched queen, adieu! You that look pale and tremble at this chance, That are but mutes or audience to this act, Had I but time—as this fell sergeant, death, Is strict in his arrest—O, I could tell you— But let it be. Horatio, I am dead; Thou livest; report me and my cause aright To the unsatisfied.	Death is coming for me quickly—Oh, I could tell you so much—But forget it.

sergeant, death	Wretched queen, adieu! You that look pale and tremble at this chance, That are but mutes or audience to this act, Had I but time—as this fell sergeant, death, Is strict in his arrest—O, I could tell you— But let it be. Horatio, I am dead; Thou livest; report me and my cause aright To the unsatisfied.	officer, death

report me and my cause aright To the unsatisfied.	You that look pale and tremble at this chance, That are but mutes or audience to this act, Had I but time—as this fell sergeant, death, Is strict in his arrest—O, I could tell you— But let it be. Horatio, I am dead; Thou livest; report me and my cause aright To the unsatisfied.	Tell the truth about me and why I did what I did to those who don't understand.

Roman than a Dane: Here’s yet some liquor left.	Never believe it: I am more an antique Roman than a Dane: Here’s yet some liquor left.	More Roman than Danish: There's still some drink left.

O good Horatio	As thou’rt a man, Give me the cup: let go; by heaven, I’ll have’t. O good Horatio, what a wounded name, Things standing thus unknown, shall live behind me! If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart, Absent thee from felicity awhile, And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain, To tell my story.	Oh, good Horatio

Horatio, what a wounded name, Things standing thus unknown, shall live behind me!	As thou’rt a man, Give me the cup: let go; by heaven, I’ll have’t. O good Horatio, what a wounded name, Things standing thus unknown, shall live behind me! If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart, Absent thee from felicity awhile, And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain, To tell my story.	Horatio, what a damaged reputation I'll have, with the truth unknown after I die!

draw thy breath in pain, To tell my story.	O good Horatio, what a wounded name, Things standing thus unknown, shall live behind me! If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart, Absent thee from felicity awhile, And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain, To tell my story. March afar off, and shot within.	live in this harsh world and suffer to tell my story.

this harsh world	O good Horatio, what a wounded name, Things standing thus unknown, shall live behind me! If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart, Absent thee from felicity awhile, And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain, To tell my story. March afar off, and shot within.	this cruel world

What warlike noise	March afar off, and shot within. What warlike noise is this?	What's that war-like noise?

This warlike volley	Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland, To the ambassadors of England gives This warlike volley.	This war-like salute

come from Poland, To the ambassadors of England gives This warlike volley.	Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland, To the ambassadors of England gives This warlike volley.	returning from Poland, gives this aggressive greeting to the English ambassadors.

The potent poison	O, I die, Horatio; The potent poison quite o’er-crows my spirit: I cannot live to hear the news from England; But I do prophesy the election lights On Fortinbras: he has my dying voice; So tell him, with the occurrents, more and less, Which have solicited. The rest is silence.	The strong poison

live to hear the news from England; But I do prophesy the election lights On Fortinbras: he has my dying voice; So tell him, with the occurrents, more and less, Which have solicited.	O, I die, Horatio; The potent poison quite o’er-crows my spirit: I cannot live to hear the news from England; But I do prophesy the election lights On Fortinbras: he has my dying voice; So tell him, with the occurrents, more and less, Which have solicited. The rest is silence.	I won't live to hear the news from England, but I predict Fortinbras will be chosen king. He has my vote as I die. Tell him everything that happened, big and small, that led to this.

aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.	What is it ye would see? If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.	If you're looking for sorrow or amazement, stop looking.

cries on havoc.	This quarry cries on havoc. O proud death, What feast is toward in thine eternal cell, That thou so many princes at a shot So bloodily hast struck?	shouts for destruction.

thine eternal cell	This quarry cries on havoc. O proud death, What feast is toward in thine eternal cell, That thou so many princes at a shot So bloodily hast struck?	your eternal home

toward in thine eternal cell, That thou so many princes at a shot So bloodily hast struck?	This quarry cries on havoc. O proud death, What feast is toward in thine eternal cell, That thou so many princes at a shot So bloodily hast struck?	What feast are you preparing in your eternal tomb, that you have killed so many nobles with one blow so violently?

affairs from England come too late: The ears are senseless that should give us hearing, To tell him his commandment is fulfill’d, That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead: Where should we have our thanks?	The sight is dismal; And our affairs from England come too late: The ears are senseless that should give us hearing, To tell him his commandment is fulfill’d, That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead: Where should we have our thanks?	News from England arrives too late. The person who should hear our report is dead, so we can't tell him his order has been carried out and Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead. Who will thank us now?

Had it the ability of life to thank you: He never gave commandment for their death.	Not from his mouth, Had it the ability of life to thank you: He never gave commandment for their death. But since, so jump upon this bloody question, You from the Polack wars, and you from England, Are here arrived give order that these bodies High on a stage be placed to the view; And let me speak to the yet unknowing world How these things came about: so shall you hear Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts, Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters, Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause, And, in this upshot, purposes mistook Fall’n on the inventors’ heads: all this can I Truly deliver.	Even if he were alive to thank you, he wouldn't, because he never ordered their deaths.

carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts	Not from his mouth, Had it the ability of life to thank you: He never gave commandment for their death. But since, so jump upon this bloody question, You from the Polack wars, and you from England, Are here arrived give order that these bodies High on a stage be placed to the view; And let me speak to the yet unknowing world How these things came about: so shall you hear Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts, Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters, Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause, And, in this upshot, purposes mistook Fall’n on the inventors’ heads: all this can I Truly deliver.	sexual, violent, and shocking deeds

casual slaughters	Not from his mouth, Had it the ability of life to thank you: He never gave commandment for their death. But since, so jump upon this bloody question, You from the Polack wars, and you from England, Are here arrived give order that these bodies High on a stage be placed to the view; And let me speak to the yet unknowing world How these things came about: so shall you hear Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts, Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters, Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause, And, in this upshot, purposes mistook Fall’n on the inventors’ heads: all this can I Truly deliver.	accidental killings

the inventors’ heads	Not from his mouth, Had it the ability of life to thank you: He never gave commandment for their death. But since, so jump upon this bloody question, You from the Polack wars, and you from England, Are here arrived give order that these bodies High on a stage be placed to the view; And let me speak to the yet unknowing world How these things came about: so shall you hear Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts, Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters, Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause, And, in this upshot, purposes mistook Fall’n on the inventors’ heads: all this can I Truly deliver.	the people who planned them

the Polack wars	Not from his mouth, Had it the ability of life to thank you: He never gave commandment for their death. But since, so jump upon this bloody question, You from the Polack wars, and you from England, Are here arrived give order that these bodies High on a stage be placed to the view; And let me speak to the yet unknowing world How these things came about: so shall you hear Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts, Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters, Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause, And, in this upshot, purposes mistook Fall’n on the inventors’ heads: all this can I Truly deliver.	the Polish wars

accidental judgments	Not from his mouth, Had it the ability of life to thank you: He never gave commandment for their death. But since, so jump upon this bloody question, You from the Polack wars, and you from England, Are here arrived give order that these bodies High on a stage be placed to the view; And let me speak to the yet unknowing world How these things came about: so shall you hear Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts, Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters, Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause, And, in this upshot, purposes mistook Fall’n on the inventors’ heads: all this can I Truly deliver.	accidental decisions

the yet unknowing world	Not from his mouth, Had it the ability of life to thank you: He never gave commandment for their death. But since, so jump upon this bloody question, You from the Polack wars, and you from England, Are here arrived give order that these bodies High on a stage be placed to the view; And let me speak to the yet unknowing world How these things came about: so shall you hear Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts, Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters, Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause, And, in this upshot, purposes mistook Fall’n on the inventors’ heads: all this can I Truly deliver.	the world that doesn't yet know

speak to the yet unknowing world How these things came about: so shall you hear Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts, Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters, Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause, And, in this upshot, purposes mistook Fall’n on the inventors’ heads: all this can I Truly deliver.	Not from his mouth, Had it the ability of life to thank you: He never gave commandment for their death. But since, so jump upon this bloody question, You from the Polack wars, and you from England, Are here arrived give order that these bodies High on a stage be placed to the view; And let me speak to the yet unknowing world How these things came about: so shall you hear Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts, Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters, Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause, And, in this upshot, purposes mistook Fall’n on the inventors’ heads: all this can I Truly deliver.	I will tell the world what happened. You will hear of immoral, violent, and unnatural deeds, of unintentional decisions, chance killings, of deaths caused by trickery and force, and how the plans of the plotters backfired and killed them instead. I can truthfully explain all of this.

cunning and forced cause	Not from his mouth, Had it the ability of life to thank you: He never gave commandment for their death. But since, so jump upon this bloody question, You from the Polack wars, and you from England, Are here arrived give order that these bodies High on a stage be placed to the view; And let me speak to the yet unknowing world How these things came about: so shall you hear Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts, Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters, Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause, And, in this upshot, purposes mistook Fall’n on the inventors’ heads: all this can I Truly deliver.	deceit and manipulated situations

embrace my fortune: I have some rights of memory in this kingdom, Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.	Let us haste to hear it, And call the noblest to the audience. For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune: I have some rights of memory in this kingdom, Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.	accept my fate. I have certain rightful claims to this kingdom, and now is the opportune moment to assert them.

more mischance	Of that I shall have also cause to speak, And from his mouth whose voice will draw on more: But let this same be presently perform’d, Even while men’s minds are wild; lest more mischance, On plots and errors, happen.	more trouble

are wild; lest more mischance, On plots and errors, happen.	Of that I shall have also cause to speak, And from his mouth whose voice will draw on more: But let this same be presently perform’d, Even while men’s minds are wild; lest more mischance, On plots and errors, happen.	are distracted, so that more trouble, caused by schemes and mistakes, doesn't occur.

men’s minds	Of that I shall have also cause to speak, And from his mouth whose voice will draw on more: But let this same be presently perform’d, Even while men’s minds are wild; lest more mischance, On plots and errors, happen.	people's thoughts

few, that made him worth while.	Amory Blaine inherited from his mother every trait, except the stray inexpressible few, that made him worth while. His father, an ineffectual, inarticulate man with a taste for Byron and a habit of drowsing over the Encyclopedia Britannica, grew wealthy at thirty through the death of two elder brothers, successful Chicago brokers, and in the first flush of feeling that the world was his, went to Bar Harbor and met Beatrice O’Hara.	few that made him special.

an ineffectual, inarticulate man	Amory Blaine inherited from his mother every trait, except the stray inexpressible few, that made him worth while. His father, an ineffectual, inarticulate man with a taste for Byron and a habit of drowsing over the Encyclopedia Britannica, grew wealthy at thirty through the death of two elder brothers, successful Chicago brokers, and in the first flush of feeling that the world was his, went to Bar Harbor and met Beatrice O’Hara. In consequence, Stephen Blaine handed down to posterity his height of just under six feet and his tendency to waver at crucial moments, these two abstractions appearing in his son Amory.	a weak, quiet man

feeling that the world was his, went to Bar Harbor and met Beatrice O’Hara.	Amory Blaine inherited from his mother every trait, except the stray inexpressible few, that made him worth while. His father, an ineffectual, inarticulate man with a taste for Byron and a habit of drowsing over the Encyclopedia Britannica, grew wealthy at thirty through the death of two elder brothers, successful Chicago brokers, and in the first flush of feeling that the world was his, went to Bar Harbor and met Beatrice O’Hara. In consequence, Stephen Blaine handed down to posterity his height of just under six feet and his tendency to waver at crucial moments, these two abstractions appearing in his son Amory.	feeling like he could do anything, he went to Bar Harbor and met Beatrice O'Hara.

two elder brothers	Amory Blaine inherited from his mother every trait, except the stray inexpressible few, that made him worth while. His father, an ineffectual, inarticulate man with a taste for Byron and a habit of drowsing over the Encyclopedia Britannica, grew wealthy at thirty through the death of two elder brothers, successful Chicago brokers, and in the first flush of feeling that the world was his, went to Bar Harbor and met Beatrice O’Hara. In consequence, Stephen Blaine handed down to posterity his height of just under six feet and his tendency to waver at crucial moments, these two abstractions appearing in his son Amory.	two older brothers

son Amory.	His father, an ineffectual, inarticulate man with a taste for Byron and a habit of drowsing over the Encyclopedia Britannica, grew wealthy at thirty through the death of two elder brothers, successful Chicago brokers, and in the first flush of feeling that the world was his, went to Bar Harbor and met Beatrice O’Hara. In consequence, Stephen Blaine handed down to posterity his height of just under six feet and his tendency to waver at crucial moments, these two abstractions appearing in his son Amory. For many years he hovered in the background of his family’s life, an unassertive figure with a face half-obliterated by lifeless, silky hair, continually occupied in “taking care” of his wife, continually harassed by the idea that he didn’t and couldn’t understand her.	son Amory.

these two abstractions	His father, an ineffectual, inarticulate man with a taste for Byron and a habit of drowsing over the Encyclopedia Britannica, grew wealthy at thirty through the death of two elder brothers, successful Chicago brokers, and in the first flush of feeling that the world was his, went to Bar Harbor and met Beatrice O’Hara. In consequence, Stephen Blaine handed down to posterity his height of just under six feet and his tendency to waver at crucial moments, these two abstractions appearing in his son Amory. For many years he hovered in the background of his family’s life, an unassertive figure with a face half-obliterated by lifeless, silky hair, continually occupied in “taking care” of his wife, continually harassed by the idea that he didn’t and couldn’t understand her.	his height and his tendency to waver

lifeless, silky hair	In consequence, Stephen Blaine handed down to posterity his height of just under six feet and his tendency to waver at crucial moments, these two abstractions appearing in his son Amory. For many years he hovered in the background of his family’s life, an unassertive figure with a face half-obliterated by lifeless, silky hair, continually occupied in “taking care” of his wife, continually harassed by the idea that he didn’t and couldn’t understand her. But Beatrice Blaine!	limp, smooth hair

an unassertive figure	In consequence, Stephen Blaine handed down to posterity his height of just under six feet and his tendency to waver at crucial moments, these two abstractions appearing in his son Amory. For many years he hovered in the background of his family’s life, an unassertive figure with a face half-obliterated by lifeless, silky hair, continually occupied in “taking care” of his wife, continually harassed by the idea that he didn’t and couldn’t understand her. But Beatrice Blaine!	a passive person

his family’s life	In consequence, Stephen Blaine handed down to posterity his height of just under six feet and his tendency to waver at crucial moments, these two abstractions appearing in his son Amory. For many years he hovered in the background of his family’s life, an unassertive figure with a face half-obliterated by lifeless, silky hair, continually occupied in “taking care” of his wife, continually harassed by the idea that he didn’t and couldn’t understand her. But Beatrice Blaine!	his family's life

hovered in the background of his family’s life, an unassertive figure with a face half-obliterated by lifeless, silky hair, continually occupied in “taking care” of his wife, continually harassed by the idea that he didn’t and couldn’t understand her.	In consequence, Stephen Blaine handed down to posterity his height of just under six feet and his tendency to waver at crucial moments, these two abstractions appearing in his son Amory. For many years he hovered in the background of his family’s life, an unassertive figure with a face half-obliterated by lifeless, silky hair, continually occupied in “taking care” of his wife, continually harassed by the idea that he didn’t and couldn’t understand her. But Beatrice Blaine!	He stayed in the background of his family's life, a quiet man with his face partly hidden by limp, smooth hair, always busy "taking care" of his wife, and constantly worried that he didn't and couldn't understand her.

But Beatrice Blaine	For many years he hovered in the background of his family’s life, an unassertive figure with a face half-obliterated by lifeless, silky hair, continually occupied in “taking care” of his wife, continually harassed by the idea that he didn’t and couldn’t understand her. But Beatrice Blaine! There was a woman!	But Beatrice Blaine!

the consummate art	There was a woman! Early pictures taken on her father’s estate at Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, or in Rome at the Sacred Heart Convent—an educational extravagance that in her youth was only for the daughters of the exceptionally wealthy—showed the exquisite delicacy of her features, the consummate art and simplicity of her clothes. A brilliant education she had—her youth passed in renaissance glory, she was versed in the latest gossip of the Older Roman Families; known by name as a fabulously wealthy American girl to Cardinal Vitori and Queen Margherita and more subtle celebrities that one must have had some culture even to have heard of.	perfect skill

the Sacred Heart Convent	There was a woman! Early pictures taken on her father’s estate at Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, or in Rome at the Sacred Heart Convent—an educational extravagance that in her youth was only for the daughters of the exceptionally wealthy—showed the exquisite delicacy of her features, the consummate art and simplicity of her clothes. A brilliant education she had—her youth passed in renaissance glory, she was versed in the latest gossip of the Older Roman Families; known by name as a fabulously wealthy American girl to Cardinal Vitori and Queen Margherita and more subtle celebrities that one must have had some culture even to have heard of.	Sacred Heart Convent

the exquisite delicacy	There was a woman! Early pictures taken on her father’s estate at Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, or in Rome at the Sacred Heart Convent—an educational extravagance that in her youth was only for the daughters of the exceptionally wealthy—showed the exquisite delicacy of her features, the consummate art and simplicity of her clothes. A brilliant education she had—her youth passed in renaissance glory, she was versed in the latest gossip of the Older Roman Families; known by name as a fabulously wealthy American girl to Cardinal Vitori and Queen Margherita and more subtle celebrities that one must have had some culture even to have heard of.	extreme beauty

an educational extravagance	There was a woman! Early pictures taken on her father’s estate at Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, or in Rome at the Sacred Heart Convent—an educational extravagance that in her youth was only for the daughters of the exceptionally wealthy—showed the exquisite delicacy of her features, the consummate art and simplicity of her clothes. A brilliant education she had—her youth passed in renaissance glory, she was versed in the latest gossip of the Older Roman Families; known by name as a fabulously wealthy American girl to Cardinal Vitori and Queen Margherita and more subtle celebrities that one must have had some culture even to have heard of.	a very expensive education

pictures taken on her father’s estate at Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, or in Rome at the Sacred Heart Convent—an educational extravagance that in her youth was only for the daughters of the exceptionally wealthy—showed the exquisite delicacy of her features, the consummate art and simplicity of her clothes.	There was a woman! Early pictures taken on her father’s estate at Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, or in Rome at the Sacred Heart Convent—an educational extravagance that in her youth was only for the daughters of the exceptionally wealthy—showed the exquisite delicacy of her features, the consummate art and simplicity of her clothes. A brilliant education she had—her youth passed in renaissance glory, she was versed in the latest gossip of the Older Roman Families; known by name as a fabulously wealthy American girl to Cardinal Vitori and Queen Margherita and more subtle celebrities that one must have had some culture even to have heard of.	Photos from her father's estate in Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, or from the Sacred Heart Convent in Rome—an expensive school only for daughters of the super-rich—revealed her beautiful, delicate face and her elegant, simple clothing.

her father’s estate	There was a woman! Early pictures taken on her father’s estate at Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, or in Rome at the Sacred Heart Convent—an educational extravagance that in her youth was only for the daughters of the exceptionally wealthy—showed the exquisite delicacy of her features, the consummate art and simplicity of her clothes. A brilliant education she had—her youth passed in renaissance glory, she was versed in the latest gossip of the Older Roman Families; known by name as a fabulously wealthy American girl to Cardinal Vitori and Queen Margherita and more subtle celebrities that one must have had some culture even to have heard of.	her father's property

girl to Cardinal Vitori and Queen Margherita and more subtle celebrities that one must have had some culture even to have heard of.	Early pictures taken on her father’s estate at Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, or in Rome at the Sacred Heart Convent—an educational extravagance that in her youth was only for the daughters of the exceptionally wealthy—showed the exquisite delicacy of her features, the consummate art and simplicity of her clothes. A brilliant education she had—her youth passed in renaissance glory, she was versed in the latest gossip of the Older Roman Families; known by name as a fabulously wealthy American girl to Cardinal Vitori and Queen Margherita and more subtle celebrities that one must have had some culture even to have heard of. She learned in England to prefer whiskey and soda to wine, and her small talk was broadened in two senses during a winter in Vienna.	She was known as a fabulously wealthy American girl to Cardinal Vitori, Queen Margherita, and other, more obscure celebrities that only cultured people would recognize.

a fabulously wealthy American girl	Early pictures taken on her father’s estate at Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, or in Rome at the Sacred Heart Convent—an educational extravagance that in her youth was only for the daughters of the exceptionally wealthy—showed the exquisite delicacy of her features, the consummate art and simplicity of her clothes. A brilliant education she had—her youth passed in renaissance glory, she was versed in the latest gossip of the Older Roman Families; known by name as a fabulously wealthy American girl to Cardinal Vitori and Queen Margherita and more subtle celebrities that one must have had some culture even to have heard of. She learned in England to prefer whiskey and soda to wine, and her small talk was broadened in two senses during a winter in Vienna.	an incredibly rich American girl

all Beatrice O’Hara	She learned in England to prefer whiskey and soda to wine, and her small talk was broadened in two senses during a winter in Vienna. All in all Beatrice O’Hara absorbed the sort of education that will be quite impossible ever again; a tutelage measured by the number of things and people one could be contemptuous of and charming about; a culture rich in all arts and traditions, barren of all ideas, in the last of those days when the great gardener clipped the inferior roses to produce one perfect bud. In her less important moments she returned to America, met Stephen Blaine and married him—this almost entirely because she was a little bit weary, a little bit sad.	Beatrice O'Hara

the great gardener	She learned in England to prefer whiskey and soda to wine, and her small talk was broadened in two senses during a winter in Vienna. All in all Beatrice O’Hara absorbed the sort of education that will be quite impossible ever again; a tutelage measured by the number of things and people one could be contemptuous of and charming about; a culture rich in all arts and traditions, barren of all ideas, in the last of those days when the great gardener clipped the inferior roses to produce one perfect bud. In her less important moments she returned to America, met Stephen Blaine and married him—this almost entirely because she was a little bit weary, a little bit sad.	the powerful elite

the inferior roses	She learned in England to prefer whiskey and soda to wine, and her small talk was broadened in two senses during a winter in Vienna. All in all Beatrice O’Hara absorbed the sort of education that will be quite impossible ever again; a tutelage measured by the number of things and people one could be contemptuous of and charming about; a culture rich in all arts and traditions, barren of all ideas, in the last of those days when the great gardener clipped the inferior roses to produce one perfect bud. In her less important moments she returned to America, met Stephen Blaine and married him—this almost entirely because she was a little bit weary, a little bit sad.	lower-quality people

culture rich in all arts and traditions, barren of all ideas, in the last of those days when the great gardener clipped the inferior roses to produce one perfect bud.	She learned in England to prefer whiskey and soda to wine, and her small talk was broadened in two senses during a winter in Vienna. All in all Beatrice O’Hara absorbed the sort of education that will be quite impossible ever again; a tutelage measured by the number of things and people one could be contemptuous of and charming about; a culture rich in all arts and traditions, barren of all ideas, in the last of those days when the great gardener clipped the inferior roses to produce one perfect bud. In her less important moments she returned to America, met Stephen Blaine and married him—this almost entirely because she was a little bit weary, a little bit sad.	a culture full of art and tradition but lacking new ideas, during the final days of a society that valued perfection by suppressing anything considered lesser.

one perfect bud	She learned in England to prefer whiskey and soda to wine, and her small talk was broadened in two senses during a winter in Vienna. All in all Beatrice O’Hara absorbed the sort of education that will be quite impossible ever again; a tutelage measured by the number of things and people one could be contemptuous of and charming about; a culture rich in all arts and traditions, barren of all ideas, in the last of those days when the great gardener clipped the inferior roses to produce one perfect bud. In her less important moments she returned to America, met Stephen Blaine and married him—this almost entirely because she was a little bit weary, a little bit sad.	a perfect result

married him—this almost entirely because she was a little bit weary, a little bit sad.	All in all Beatrice O’Hara absorbed the sort of education that will be quite impossible ever again; a tutelage measured by the number of things and people one could be contemptuous of and charming about; a culture rich in all arts and traditions, barren of all ideas, in the last of those days when the great gardener clipped the inferior roses to produce one perfect bud. In her less important moments she returned to America, met Stephen Blaine and married him—this almost entirely because she was a little bit weary, a little bit sad. Her only child was carried through a tiresome season and brought into the world on a spring day in ninety-six.	married him mostly because she was tired and a bit sad.

a tiresome season	In her less important moments she returned to America, met Stephen Blaine and married him—this almost entirely because she was a little bit weary, a little bit sad. Her only child was carried through a tiresome season and brought into the world on a spring day in ninety-six. When Amory was five he was already a delightful companion for her.	a difficult pregnancy

brought into the world on a spring day in ninety-six.	In her less important moments she returned to America, met Stephen Blaine and married him—this almost entirely because she was a little bit weary, a little bit sad. Her only child was carried through a tiresome season and brought into the world on a spring day in ninety-six. When Amory was five he was already a delightful companion for her.	born on a spring day in 1896.

was already a delightful companion for her.	Her only child was carried through a tiresome season and brought into the world on a spring day in ninety-six. When Amory was five he was already a delightful companion for her. He was an auburn-haired boy, with great, handsome eyes which he would grow up to in time, a facile imaginative mind and a taste for fancy dress.	was already a joy to be around.

a delightful companion	Her only child was carried through a tiresome season and brought into the world on a spring day in ninety-six. When Amory was five he was already a delightful companion for her. He was an auburn-haired boy, with great, handsome eyes which he would grow up to in time, a facile imaginative mind and a taste for fancy dress.	enjoyable to be with

a facile imaginative mind	When Amory was five he was already a delightful companion for her. He was an auburn-haired boy, with great, handsome eyes which he would grow up to in time, a facile imaginative mind and a taste for fancy dress. From his fourth to his tenth year he did the country with his mother in her father’s private car, from Coronado, where his mother became so bored that she had a nervous breakdown in a fashionable hotel, down to Mexico City, where she took a mild, almost epidemic consumption.	an active and creative mind

an auburn-haired boy	When Amory was five he was already a delightful companion for her. He was an auburn-haired boy, with great, handsome eyes which he would grow up to in time, a facile imaginative mind and a taste for fancy dress. From his fourth to his tenth year he did the country with his mother in her father’s private car, from Coronado, where his mother became so bored that she had a nervous breakdown in a fashionable hotel, down to Mexico City, where she took a mild, almost epidemic consumption.	a boy with reddish-brown hair

great, handsome eyes	When Amory was five he was already a delightful companion for her. He was an auburn-haired boy, with great, handsome eyes which he would grow up to in time, a facile imaginative mind and a taste for fancy dress. From his fourth to his tenth year he did the country with his mother in her father’s private car, from Coronado, where his mother became so bored that she had a nervous breakdown in a fashionable hotel, down to Mexico City, where she took a mild, almost epidemic consumption.	big, attractive eyes

his tenth year	He was an auburn-haired boy, with great, handsome eyes which he would grow up to in time, a facile imaginative mind and a taste for fancy dress. From his fourth to his tenth year he did the country with his mother in her father’s private car, from Coronado, where his mother became so bored that she had a nervous breakdown in a fashionable hotel, down to Mexico City, where she took a mild, almost epidemic consumption. This trouble pleased her, and later she made use of it as an intrinsic part of her atmosphere—especially after several astounding bracers.	his tenth year

a mild, almost epidemic consumption	He was an auburn-haired boy, with great, handsome eyes which he would grow up to in time, a facile imaginative mind and a taste for fancy dress. From his fourth to his tenth year he did the country with his mother in her father’s private car, from Coronado, where his mother became so bored that she had a nervous breakdown in a fashionable hotel, down to Mexico City, where she took a mild, almost epidemic consumption. This trouble pleased her, and later she made use of it as an intrinsic part of her atmosphere—especially after several astounding bracers.	a light case of tuberculosis, almost widespread

her father’s private car	He was an auburn-haired boy, with great, handsome eyes which he would grow up to in time, a facile imaginative mind and a taste for fancy dress. From his fourth to his tenth year he did the country with his mother in her father’s private car, from Coronado, where his mother became so bored that she had a nervous breakdown in a fashionable hotel, down to Mexico City, where she took a mild, almost epidemic consumption. This trouble pleased her, and later she made use of it as an intrinsic part of her atmosphere—especially after several astounding bracers.	her father's personal train car

breakdown in a fashionable hotel, down to Mexico City, where she took a mild, almost epidemic consumption.	He was an auburn-haired boy, with great, handsome eyes which he would grow up to in time, a facile imaginative mind and a taste for fancy dress. From his fourth to his tenth year he did the country with his mother in her father’s private car, from Coronado, where his mother became so bored that she had a nervous breakdown in a fashionable hotel, down to Mexico City, where she took a mild, almost epidemic consumption. This trouble pleased her, and later she made use of it as an intrinsic part of her atmosphere—especially after several astounding bracers.	nervous breakdown in a fancy hotel, then to Mexico City, where she caught a slight case of tuberculosis that was going around.

a fashionable hotel	He was an auburn-haired boy, with great, handsome eyes which he would grow up to in time, a facile imaginative mind and a taste for fancy dress. From his fourth to his tenth year he did the country with his mother in her father’s private car, from Coronado, where his mother became so bored that she had a nervous breakdown in a fashionable hotel, down to Mexico City, where she took a mild, almost epidemic consumption. This trouble pleased her, and later she made use of it as an intrinsic part of her atmosphere—especially after several astounding bracers.	a fancy hotel

part of her atmosphere—especially after several astounding bracers.	From his fourth to his tenth year he did the country with his mother in her father’s private car, from Coronado, where his mother became so bored that she had a nervous breakdown in a fashionable hotel, down to Mexico City, where she took a mild, almost epidemic consumption. This trouble pleased her, and later she made use of it as an intrinsic part of her atmosphere—especially after several astounding bracers. So, while more or less fortunate little rich boys were defying governesses on the beach at Newport, or being spanked or tutored or read to from Do and Dare, or Frank on the Mississippi, Amory was biting acquiescent bellboys in the Waldorf, outgrowing a natural repugnance to chamber music and symphonies, and deriving a highly specialized education from his mother.	part of her personality, especially after a few strong drinks.

several astounding bracers	From his fourth to his tenth year he did the country with his mother in her father’s private car, from Coronado, where his mother became so bored that she had a nervous breakdown in a fashionable hotel, down to Mexico City, where she took a mild, almost epidemic consumption. This trouble pleased her, and later she made use of it as an intrinsic part of her atmosphere—especially after several astounding bracers. So, while more or less fortunate little rich boys were defying governesses on the beach at Newport, or being spanked or tutored or read to from Do and Dare, or Frank on the Mississippi, Amory was biting acquiescent bellboys in the Waldorf, outgrowing a natural repugnance to chamber music and symphonies, and deriving a highly specialized education from his mother.	several strong drinks

an intrinsic part	From his fourth to his tenth year he did the country with his mother in her father’s private car, from Coronado, where his mother became so bored that she had a nervous breakdown in a fashionable hotel, down to Mexico City, where she took a mild, almost epidemic consumption. This trouble pleased her, and later she made use of it as an intrinsic part of her atmosphere—especially after several astounding bracers. So, while more or less fortunate little rich boys were defying governesses on the beach at Newport, or being spanked or tutored or read to from Do and Dare, or Frank on the Mississippi, Amory was biting acquiescent bellboys in the Waldorf, outgrowing a natural repugnance to chamber music and symphonies, and deriving a highly specialized education from his mother.	a basic part

acquiescent bellboys	This trouble pleased her, and later she made use of it as an intrinsic part of her atmosphere—especially after several astounding bracers. So, while more or less fortunate little rich boys were defying governesses on the beach at Newport, or being spanked or tutored or read to from Do and Dare, or Frank on the Mississippi, Amory was biting acquiescent bellboys in the Waldorf, outgrowing a natural repugnance to chamber music and symphonies, and deriving a highly specialized education from his mother. “Amory.”	bellboys who agreed to his antics

a natural repugnance	This trouble pleased her, and later she made use of it as an intrinsic part of her atmosphere—especially after several astounding bracers. So, while more or less fortunate little rich boys were defying governesses on the beach at Newport, or being spanked or tutored or read to from Do and Dare, or Frank on the Mississippi, Amory was biting acquiescent bellboys in the Waldorf, outgrowing a natural repugnance to chamber music and symphonies, and deriving a highly specialized education from his mother. “Amory.”	a natural dislike

more or less fortunate little rich boys	This trouble pleased her, and later she made use of it as an intrinsic part of her atmosphere—especially after several astounding bracers. So, while more or less fortunate little rich boys were defying governesses on the beach at Newport, or being spanked or tutored or read to from Do and Dare, or Frank on the Mississippi, Amory was biting acquiescent bellboys in the Waldorf, outgrowing a natural repugnance to chamber music and symphonies, and deriving a highly specialized education from his mother. “Amory.”	richer or poorer young boys

governesses on the beach at Newport, or being spanked or tutored or read to from Do and Dare, or Frank on the Mississippi, Amory was biting acquiescent bellboys in the Waldorf, outgrowing a natural repugnance to chamber music and symphonies, and deriving a highly specialized education from his mother.	This trouble pleased her, and later she made use of it as an intrinsic part of her atmosphere—especially after several astounding bracers. So, while more or less fortunate little rich boys were defying governesses on the beach at Newport, or being spanked or tutored or read to from Do and Dare, or Frank on the Mississippi, Amory was biting acquiescent bellboys in the Waldorf, outgrowing a natural repugnance to chamber music and symphonies, and deriving a highly specialized education from his mother. “Amory.”	tutors on the beach at Newport, or being spanked, taught, or read adventure stories, Amory was biting willing bellboys in the Waldorf, starting to like classical music, and getting a unique education from his mother.

“Yes, Beatrice	“Amory.” “Yes, Beatrice.” (Such a quaint name for his mother; she encouraged it.)	Yes, Beatrice.

name for his mother; she encouraged it.)	“Yes, Beatrice.” (Such a quaint name for his mother; she encouraged it.) “Dear, don’t think of getting out of bed yet.	name for his mother; she liked him to use it.)

rising in early life makes one nervous.	“Dear, don’t think of getting out of bed yet. I’ve always suspected that early rising in early life makes one nervous. Clothilde is having your breakfast brought up.”	getting up early when you're young makes you anxious.

facile as Bernhardt’s.	“All right.” “I am feeling very old today, Amory,” she would sigh, her face a rare cameo of pathos, her voice exquisitely modulated, her hands as facile as Bernhardt’s. “My nerves are on edge—on edge.	as skilled as Bernhardt's.

a rare cameo	“All right.” “I am feeling very old today, Amory,” she would sigh, her face a rare cameo of pathos, her voice exquisitely modulated, her hands as facile as Bernhardt’s. “My nerves are on edge—on edge.	unusually sad

this terrifying place	“My nerves are on edge—on edge. We must leave this terrifying place tomorrow and go searching for sunshine.” Amory’s penetrating green eyes would look out through tangled hair at his mother.	this scary place

tangled hair	We must leave this terrifying place tomorrow and go searching for sunshine.” Amory’s penetrating green eyes would look out through tangled hair at his mother. Even at this age he had no illusions about her.	messy hair

had no illusions about her.	Amory’s penetrating green eyes would look out through tangled hair at his mother. Even at this age he had no illusions about her. “Amory.”	He knew what she was like.

talk glibly, if rather reminiscently, of Brahms and Mozart and Beethoven.	You can read in the tub if you wish.” She fed him sections of the Fêtes Galantes before he was ten; at eleven he could talk glibly, if rather reminiscently, of Brahms and Mozart and Beethoven. One afternoon, when left alone in the hotel at Hot Springs, he sampled his mother’s apricot cordial, and as the taste pleased him, he became quite tipsy.	talk easily, though in a way that sounded like he was just repeating what he'd heard, about Brahms, Mozart, and Beethoven.

the Fêtes Galantes	You can read in the tub if you wish.” She fed him sections of the Fêtes Galantes before he was ten; at eleven he could talk glibly, if rather reminiscently, of Brahms and Mozart and Beethoven. One afternoon, when left alone in the hotel at Hot Springs, he sampled his mother’s apricot cordial, and as the taste pleased him, he became quite tipsy.	Elegant entertainments.

sampled his mother’s apricot cordial, and as the taste pleased him, he became quite tipsy.	She fed him sections of the Fêtes Galantes before he was ten; at eleven he could talk glibly, if rather reminiscently, of Brahms and Mozart and Beethoven. One afternoon, when left alone in the hotel at Hot Springs, he sampled his mother’s apricot cordial, and as the taste pleased him, he became quite tipsy. This was fun for a while, but he essayed a cigarette in his exaltation, and succumbed to a vulgar, plebeian reaction.	tried his mother's apricot drink, and because he liked the taste, he got drunk.

a vulgar, plebeian reaction	One afternoon, when left alone in the hotel at Hot Springs, he sampled his mother’s apricot cordial, and as the taste pleased him, he became quite tipsy. This was fun for a while, but he essayed a cigarette in his exaltation, and succumbed to a vulgar, plebeian reaction. Though this incident horrified Beatrice, it also secretly amused her and became part of what in a later generation would have been termed her “line.”	a common, unpleasant reaction

essayed a cigarette in his exaltation, and succumbed to a vulgar, plebeian reaction.	One afternoon, when left alone in the hotel at Hot Springs, he sampled his mother’s apricot cordial, and as the taste pleased him, he became quite tipsy. This was fun for a while, but he essayed a cigarette in his exaltation, and succumbed to a vulgar, plebeian reaction. Though this incident horrified Beatrice, it also secretly amused her and became part of what in a later generation would have been termed her “line.”	tried to smoke a cigarette while feeling high, but then had a nasty, common reaction.

part of what in a later generation would have been termed her “line.”	This was fun for a while, but he essayed a cigarette in his exaltation, and succumbed to a vulgar, plebeian reaction. Though this incident horrified Beatrice, it also secretly amused her and became part of what in a later generation would have been termed her “line.” “This son of mine,” he heard her tell a room full of awestruck, admiring women one day, “is entirely sophisticated and quite charming—but delicate—we’re all delicate; here, you know.”	part of her "routine" or "act."

son of mine,” he heard her tell a room full of awestruck, admiring women one day, “is entirely sophisticated and quite charming—but delicate—we’re all delicate; here, you know.”	Though this incident horrified Beatrice, it also secretly amused her and became part of what in a later generation would have been termed her “line.” “This son of mine,” he heard her tell a room full of awestruck, admiring women one day, “is entirely sophisticated and quite charming—but delicate—we’re all delicate; here, you know.” Her hand was radiantly outlined against her beautiful bosom; then sinking her voice to a whisper, she told them of the apricot cordial.	"My son," he overheard her saying to a room full of impressed and admiring women, "is very worldly and quite delightful—but sensitive—we're all sensitive; you understand."

sinking her voice to a whisper, she told them of the apricot cordial.	“This son of mine,” he heard her tell a room full of awestruck, admiring women one day, “is entirely sophisticated and quite charming—but delicate—we’re all delicate; here, you know.” Her hand was radiantly outlined against her beautiful bosom; then sinking her voice to a whisper, she told them of the apricot cordial. They rejoiced, for she was a brave raconteuse, but many were the keys turned in sideboard locks that night against the possible defection of little Bobby or Barbara.	lowering her voice, she told them about the apricot cordial.

her beautiful bosom	“This son of mine,” he heard her tell a room full of awestruck, admiring women one day, “is entirely sophisticated and quite charming—but delicate—we’re all delicate; here, you know.” Her hand was radiantly outlined against her beautiful bosom; then sinking her voice to a whisper, she told them of the apricot cordial. They rejoiced, for she was a brave raconteuse, but many were the keys turned in sideboard locks that night against the possible defection of little Bobby or Barbara.	her beautiful chest

rejoiced, for she was a brave raconteuse, but many were the keys turned in sideboard locks that night against the possible defection of little Bobby or Barbara.	Her hand was radiantly outlined against her beautiful bosom; then sinking her voice to a whisper, she told them of the apricot cordial. They rejoiced, for she was a brave raconteuse, but many were the keys turned in sideboard locks that night against the possible defection of little Bobby or Barbara. These domestic pilgrimages were invariably in state; two maids, the private car, or Mr. Blaine when available, and very often a physician.	were happy because she was a great storyteller, but many people locked up their liquor cabinets that night to prevent Bobby or Barbara from sneaking a drink.

the possible defection	Her hand was radiantly outlined against her beautiful bosom; then sinking her voice to a whisper, she told them of the apricot cordial. They rejoiced, for she was a brave raconteuse, but many were the keys turned in sideboard locks that night against the possible defection of little Bobby or Barbara. These domestic pilgrimages were invariably in state; two maids, the private car, or Mr. Blaine when available, and very often a physician.	the possibility of sneaking off

a brave raconteuse	Her hand was radiantly outlined against her beautiful bosom; then sinking her voice to a whisper, she told them of the apricot cordial. They rejoiced, for she was a brave raconteuse, but many were the keys turned in sideboard locks that night against the possible defection of little Bobby or Barbara. These domestic pilgrimages were invariably in state; two maids, the private car, or Mr. Blaine when available, and very often a physician.	a skilled storyteller

sideboard locks	Her hand was radiantly outlined against her beautiful bosom; then sinking her voice to a whisper, she told them of the apricot cordial. They rejoiced, for she was a brave raconteuse, but many were the keys turned in sideboard locks that night against the possible defection of little Bobby or Barbara. These domestic pilgrimages were invariably in state; two maids, the private car, or Mr. Blaine when available, and very often a physician.	locked sideboards

These domestic pilgrimages	They rejoiced, for she was a brave raconteuse, but many were the keys turned in sideboard locks that night against the possible defection of little Bobby or Barbara. These domestic pilgrimages were invariably in state; two maids, the private car, or Mr. Blaine when available, and very often a physician. When Amory had the whooping-cough four disgusted specialists glared at each other hunched around his bed; when he took scarlet fever the number of attendants, including physicians and nurses, totalled fourteen.	These trips to their homes

car, or Mr. Blaine when available, and very often a physician.	They rejoiced, for she was a brave raconteuse, but many were the keys turned in sideboard locks that night against the possible defection of little Bobby or Barbara. These domestic pilgrimages were invariably in state; two maids, the private car, or Mr. Blaine when available, and very often a physician. When Amory had the whooping-cough four disgusted specialists glared at each other hunched around his bed; when he took scarlet fever the number of attendants, including physicians and nurses, totalled fourteen.	the car, or Mr. Blaine if he was free, and usually a doctor.

two maids	They rejoiced, for she was a brave raconteuse, but many were the keys turned in sideboard locks that night against the possible defection of little Bobby or Barbara. These domestic pilgrimages were invariably in state; two maids, the private car, or Mr. Blaine when available, and very often a physician. When Amory had the whooping-cough four disgusted specialists glared at each other hunched around his bed; when he took scarlet fever the number of attendants, including physicians and nurses, totalled fourteen.	two maids

scarlet fever	These domestic pilgrimages were invariably in state; two maids, the private car, or Mr. Blaine when available, and very often a physician. When Amory had the whooping-cough four disgusted specialists glared at each other hunched around his bed; when he took scarlet fever the number of attendants, including physicians and nurses, totalled fourteen. However, blood being thicker than broth, he was pulled through.	scarlet fever

totalled fourteen.	These domestic pilgrimages were invariably in state; two maids, the private car, or Mr. Blaine when available, and very often a physician. When Amory had the whooping-cough four disgusted specialists glared at each other hunched around his bed; when he took scarlet fever the number of attendants, including physicians and nurses, totalled fourteen. However, blood being thicker than broth, he was pulled through.	Came to fourteen in all.

the whooping-cough four disgusted specialists	These domestic pilgrimages were invariably in state; two maids, the private car, or Mr. Blaine when available, and very often a physician. When Amory had the whooping-cough four disgusted specialists glared at each other hunched around his bed; when he took scarlet fever the number of attendants, including physicians and nurses, totalled fourteen. However, blood being thicker than broth, he was pulled through.	four annoyed specialists for whooping cough

serve in place of friends, and an enviable standing from Pasadena to Cape Cod.	The Blaines were attached to no city. They were the Blaines of Lake Geneva; they had quite enough relatives to serve in place of friends, and an enviable standing from Pasadena to Cape Cod. But Beatrice grew more and more prone to like only new acquaintances, as there were certain stories, such as the history of her constitution and its many amendments, memories of her years abroad, that it was necessary for her to repeat at regular intervals.	act like friends, and were well-respected everywhere from Pasadena to Cape Cod.

an enviable standing	The Blaines were attached to no city. They were the Blaines of Lake Geneva; they had quite enough relatives to serve in place of friends, and an enviable standing from Pasadena to Cape Cod. But Beatrice grew more and more prone to like only new acquaintances, as there were certain stories, such as the history of her constitution and its many amendments, memories of her years abroad, that it was necessary for her to repeat at regular intervals.	a respected position

grew more and more prone to like only new acquaintances, as there were certain stories, such as the history of her constitution and its many amendments, memories of her years abroad, that it was necessary for her to repeat at regular intervals.	They were the Blaines of Lake Geneva; they had quite enough relatives to serve in place of friends, and an enviable standing from Pasadena to Cape Cod. But Beatrice grew more and more prone to like only new acquaintances, as there were certain stories, such as the history of her constitution and its many amendments, memories of her years abroad, that it was necessary for her to repeat at regular intervals. Like Freudian dreams, they must be thrown off, else they would sweep in and lay siege to her nerves.	started preferring new people because she needed to tell certain stories regularly, like the story of her health and her travels.

only new acquaintances	They were the Blaines of Lake Geneva; they had quite enough relatives to serve in place of friends, and an enviable standing from Pasadena to Cape Cod. But Beatrice grew more and more prone to like only new acquaintances, as there were certain stories, such as the history of her constitution and its many amendments, memories of her years abroad, that it was necessary for her to repeat at regular intervals. Like Freudian dreams, they must be thrown off, else they would sweep in and lay siege to her nerves.	only new people

Freudian dreams	But Beatrice grew more and more prone to like only new acquaintances, as there were certain stories, such as the history of her constitution and its many amendments, memories of her years abroad, that it was necessary for her to repeat at regular intervals. Like Freudian dreams, they must be thrown off, else they would sweep in and lay siege to her nerves. But Beatrice was critical about American women, especially the floating population of ex-Westerners.	Like dreams that Freud would analyze.

lay siege to her nerves.	But Beatrice grew more and more prone to like only new acquaintances, as there were certain stories, such as the history of her constitution and its many amendments, memories of her years abroad, that it was necessary for her to repeat at regular intervals. Like Freudian dreams, they must be thrown off, else they would sweep in and lay siege to her nerves. But Beatrice was critical about American women, especially the floating population of ex-Westerners.	overwhelm her and make her anxious.

critical about American women, especially the floating population of ex-Westerners.	Like Freudian dreams, they must be thrown off, else they would sweep in and lay siege to her nerves. But Beatrice was critical about American women, especially the floating population of ex-Westerners. “They have accents, my dear,” she told Amory, “not Southern accents or Boston accents, not an accent attached to any locality, just an accent”—she became dreamy.	judgmental of American women, particularly those drifters who used to live out West.

attached to any locality, just an accent”—she became dreamy.	But Beatrice was critical about American women, especially the floating population of ex-Westerners. “They have accents, my dear,” she told Amory, “not Southern accents or Boston accents, not an accent attached to any locality, just an accent”—she became dreamy. “They pick up old, moth-eaten London accents that are down on their luck and have to be used by someone.	connected to any specific place, just a strange accent"—she started daydreaming.

just an accent”—she	But Beatrice was critical about American women, especially the floating population of ex-Westerners. “They have accents, my dear,” she told Amory, “not Southern accents or Boston accents, not an accent attached to any locality, just an accent”—she became dreamy. “They pick up old, moth-eaten London accents that are down on their luck and have to be used by someone.	just an accent

old, moth-eaten London accents	“They have accents, my dear,” she told Amory, “not Southern accents or Boston accents, not an accent attached to any locality, just an accent”—she became dreamy. “They pick up old, moth-eaten London accents that are down on their luck and have to be used by someone. They talk as an English butler might after several years in a Chicago grand-opera company.”	old, worn-out London accents

down on their luck and have to be used by someone.	“They have accents, my dear,” she told Amory, “not Southern accents or Boston accents, not an accent attached to any locality, just an accent”—she became dreamy. “They pick up old, moth-eaten London accents that are down on their luck and have to be used by someone. They talk as an English butler might after several years in a Chicago grand-opera company.”	unlucky and needing someone to use them.

after several years in a Chicago grand-opera company.”	“They pick up old, moth-eaten London accents that are down on their luck and have to be used by someone. They talk as an English butler might after several years in a Chicago grand-opera company.” She became almost incoherent—“Suppose—time in every Western woman’s life—she feels her husband is prosperous enough for her to have—accent—they try to impress me, my dear—” Though she thought of her body as a mass of frailties, she considered her soul quite as ill, and therefore important in her life.	after working for years at a Chicago opera.

time in every Western woman’s life—she feels her husband is prosperous enough for her to have—accent—they try to impress me, my dear—” Though she thought of her body as a mass of frailties, she considered her soul quite as ill, and therefore important in her life.	They talk as an English butler might after several years in a Chicago grand-opera company.” She became almost incoherent—“Suppose—time in every Western woman’s life—she feels her husband is prosperous enough for her to have—accent—they try to impress me, my dear—” Though she thought of her body as a mass of frailties, she considered her soul quite as ill, and therefore important in her life. She had once been a Catholic, but discovering that priests were infinitely more attentive when she was in process of losing or regaining faith in Mother Church, she maintained an enchantingly wavering attitude.	there comes a point when a Western woman feels her husband is rich enough for her to get an accent, and they try to impress me, dear. She thought her body was weak, but her soul was just as troubled and important.

every Western woman’s life	They talk as an English butler might after several years in a Chicago grand-opera company.” She became almost incoherent—“Suppose—time in every Western woman’s life—she feels her husband is prosperous enough for her to have—accent—they try to impress me, my dear—” Though she thought of her body as a mass of frailties, she considered her soul quite as ill, and therefore important in her life. She had once been a Catholic, but discovering that priests were infinitely more attentive when she was in process of losing or regaining faith in Mother Church, she maintained an enchantingly wavering attitude.	every Western woman's life

an enchantingly wavering attitude	She became almost incoherent—“Suppose—time in every Western woman’s life—she feels her husband is prosperous enough for her to have—accent—they try to impress me, my dear—” Though she thought of her body as a mass of frailties, she considered her soul quite as ill, and therefore important in her life. She had once been a Catholic, but discovering that priests were infinitely more attentive when she was in process of losing or regaining faith in Mother Church, she maintained an enchantingly wavering attitude. Often she deplored the bourgeois quality of the American Catholic clergy, and was quite sure that had she lived in the shadow of the great Continental cathedrals her soul would still be a thin flame on the mighty altar of Rome.	a charmingly indecisive stance

process of losing or regaining faith in Mother Church, she maintained an enchantingly wavering attitude.	She became almost incoherent—“Suppose—time in every Western woman’s life—she feels her husband is prosperous enough for her to have—accent—they try to impress me, my dear—” Though she thought of her body as a mass of frailties, she considered her soul quite as ill, and therefore important in her life. She had once been a Catholic, but discovering that priests were infinitely more attentive when she was in process of losing or regaining faith in Mother Church, she maintained an enchantingly wavering attitude. Often she deplored the bourgeois quality of the American Catholic clergy, and was quite sure that had she lived in the shadow of the great Continental cathedrals her soul would still be a thin flame on the mighty altar of Rome.	losing or finding her faith in the Catholic Church, she acted in a charmingly indecisive way.

lived in the shadow of the great Continental cathedrals her soul would still be a thin flame on the mighty altar of Rome.	She had once been a Catholic, but discovering that priests were infinitely more attentive when she was in process of losing or regaining faith in Mother Church, she maintained an enchantingly wavering attitude. Often she deplored the bourgeois quality of the American Catholic clergy, and was quite sure that had she lived in the shadow of the great Continental cathedrals her soul would still be a thin flame on the mighty altar of Rome. Still, next to doctors, priests were her favorite sport.	lived near Europe's grand cathedrals, she'd still be a devout Catholic.

the American Catholic clergy	She had once been a Catholic, but discovering that priests were infinitely more attentive when she was in process of losing or regaining faith in Mother Church, she maintained an enchantingly wavering attitude. Often she deplored the bourgeois quality of the American Catholic clergy, and was quite sure that had she lived in the shadow of the great Continental cathedrals her soul would still be a thin flame on the mighty altar of Rome. Still, next to doctors, priests were her favorite sport.	American Catholic priests

the bourgeois quality	She had once been a Catholic, but discovering that priests were infinitely more attentive when she was in process of losing or regaining faith in Mother Church, she maintained an enchantingly wavering attitude. Often she deplored the bourgeois quality of the American Catholic clergy, and was quite sure that had she lived in the shadow of the great Continental cathedrals her soul would still be a thin flame on the mighty altar of Rome. Still, next to doctors, priests were her favorite sport.	the middle-class ordinariness

the mighty altar	She had once been a Catholic, but discovering that priests were infinitely more attentive when she was in process of losing or regaining faith in Mother Church, she maintained an enchantingly wavering attitude. Often she deplored the bourgeois quality of the American Catholic clergy, and was quite sure that had she lived in the shadow of the great Continental cathedrals her soul would still be a thin flame on the mighty altar of Rome. Still, next to doctors, priests were her favorite sport.	the grand altar

the clergyman—“but my mood	“Ah, Bishop Wiston,” she would declare, “I do not want to talk of myself. I can imagine the stream of hysterical women fluttering at your doors, beseeching you to be simpatico”—then after an interlude filled by the clergyman—“but my mood—is—oddly dissimilar.” Only to bishops and above did she divulge her clerical romance.	—is—oddly dissimilar.”

imagine the stream of hysterical women fluttering at your doors, beseeching you to be simpatico”—then after an interlude filled by the clergyman—“but my mood—is—oddly dissimilar.”	“Ah, Bishop Wiston,” she would declare, “I do not want to talk of myself. I can imagine the stream of hysterical women fluttering at your doors, beseeching you to be simpatico”—then after an interlude filled by the clergyman—“but my mood—is—oddly dissimilar.” Only to bishops and above did she divulge her clerical romance.	I can imagine all the frantic women swarming your office, begging you for sympathy"—then after a pause while the clergyman spoke—"but my mood is quite different."

hysterical women	“Ah, Bishop Wiston,” she would declare, “I do not want to talk of myself. I can imagine the stream of hysterical women fluttering at your doors, beseeching you to be simpatico”—then after an interlude filled by the clergyman—“but my mood—is—oddly dissimilar.” Only to bishops and above did she divulge her clerical romance.	overly emotional women

her clerical romance	I can imagine the stream of hysterical women fluttering at your doors, beseeching you to be simpatico”—then after an interlude filled by the clergyman—“but my mood—is—oddly dissimilar.” Only to bishops and above did she divulge her clerical romance. When she had first returned to her country there had been a pagan, Swinburnian young man in Asheville, for whose passionate kisses and unsentimental conversations she had taken a decided penchant—they had discussed the matter pro and con with an intellectual romancing quite devoid of sappiness.	her love affair with a clergyman

divulge her clerical romance.	I can imagine the stream of hysterical women fluttering at your doors, beseeching you to be simpatico”—then after an interlude filled by the clergyman—“but my mood—is—oddly dissimilar.” Only to bishops and above did she divulge her clerical romance. When she had first returned to her country there had been a pagan, Swinburnian young man in Asheville, for whose passionate kisses and unsentimental conversations she had taken a decided penchant—they had discussed the matter pro and con with an intellectual romancing quite devoid of sappiness.	reveal her romance with a clergyman.

a decided penchant	Only to bishops and above did she divulge her clerical romance. When she had first returned to her country there had been a pagan, Swinburnian young man in Asheville, for whose passionate kisses and unsentimental conversations she had taken a decided penchant—they had discussed the matter pro and con with an intellectual romancing quite devoid of sappiness. Eventually she had decided to marry for background, and the young pagan from Asheville had gone through a spiritual crisis, joined the Catholic Church, and was now—Monsignor Darcy.	a strong liking

whose passionate kisses	Only to bishops and above did she divulge her clerical romance. When she had first returned to her country there had been a pagan, Swinburnian young man in Asheville, for whose passionate kisses and unsentimental conversations she had taken a decided penchant—they had discussed the matter pro and con with an intellectual romancing quite devoid of sappiness. Eventually she had decided to marry for background, and the young pagan from Asheville had gone through a spiritual crisis, joined the Catholic Church, and was now—Monsignor Darcy.	whose ardent kisses

Swinburnian young man	Only to bishops and above did she divulge her clerical romance. When she had first returned to her country there had been a pagan, Swinburnian young man in Asheville, for whose passionate kisses and unsentimental conversations she had taken a decided penchant—they had discussed the matter pro and con with an intellectual romancing quite devoid of sappiness. Eventually she had decided to marry for background, and the young pagan from Asheville had gone through a spiritual crisis, joined the Catholic Church, and was now—Monsignor Darcy.	A young man like Swinburne

unsentimental conversations	Only to bishops and above did she divulge her clerical romance. When she had first returned to her country there had been a pagan, Swinburnian young man in Asheville, for whose passionate kisses and unsentimental conversations she had taken a decided penchant—they had discussed the matter pro and con with an intellectual romancing quite devoid of sappiness. Eventually she had decided to marry for background, and the young pagan from Asheville had gone through a spiritual crisis, joined the Catholic Church, and was now—Monsignor Darcy.	conversations without excessive emotion

an intellectual romancing	Only to bishops and above did she divulge her clerical romance. When she had first returned to her country there had been a pagan, Swinburnian young man in Asheville, for whose passionate kisses and unsentimental conversations she had taken a decided penchant—they had discussed the matter pro and con with an intellectual romancing quite devoid of sappiness. Eventually she had decided to marry for background, and the young pagan from Asheville had gone through a spiritual crisis, joined the Catholic Church, and was now—Monsignor Darcy.	intellectual flirting

discussed the matter pro and con with an intellectual romancing quite devoid of sappiness.	Only to bishops and above did she divulge her clerical romance. When she had first returned to her country there had been a pagan, Swinburnian young man in Asheville, for whose passionate kisses and unsentimental conversations she had taken a decided penchant—they had discussed the matter pro and con with an intellectual romancing quite devoid of sappiness. Eventually she had decided to marry for background, and the young pagan from Asheville had gone through a spiritual crisis, joined the Catholic Church, and was now—Monsignor Darcy.	talked about it intellectually and romantically without being overly sentimental.

gone through a spiritual crisis, joined the Catholic Church, and was now—Monsignor Darcy.	When she had first returned to her country there had been a pagan, Swinburnian young man in Asheville, for whose passionate kisses and unsentimental conversations she had taken a decided penchant—they had discussed the matter pro and con with an intellectual romancing quite devoid of sappiness. Eventually she had decided to marry for background, and the young pagan from Asheville had gone through a spiritual crisis, joined the Catholic Church, and was now—Monsignor Darcy. “Indeed, Mrs. Blaine, he is still delightful company—quite the cardinal’s right-hand man.”	had a spiritual crisis, became a Catholic, and was now a Monsignor Darcy.

the young pagan	When she had first returned to her country there had been a pagan, Swinburnian young man in Asheville, for whose passionate kisses and unsentimental conversations she had taken a decided penchant—they had discussed the matter pro and con with an intellectual romancing quite devoid of sappiness. Eventually she had decided to marry for background, and the young pagan from Asheville had gone through a spiritual crisis, joined the Catholic Church, and was now—Monsignor Darcy. “Indeed, Mrs. Blaine, he is still delightful company—quite the cardinal’s right-hand man.”	the young non-religious man

company—quite the cardinal’s right-hand man.”	Eventually she had decided to marry for background, and the young pagan from Asheville had gone through a spiritual crisis, joined the Catholic Church, and was now—Monsignor Darcy. “Indeed, Mrs. Blaine, he is still delightful company—quite the cardinal’s right-hand man.” “Amory will go to him one day, I know,” breathed the beautiful lady, “and Monsignor Darcy will understand him as he understood me.”	company—practically the cardinal's most important assistant.”

delightful company	Eventually she had decided to marry for background, and the young pagan from Asheville had gone through a spiritual crisis, joined the Catholic Church, and was now—Monsignor Darcy. “Indeed, Mrs. Blaine, he is still delightful company—quite the cardinal’s right-hand man.” “Amory will go to him one day, I know,” breathed the beautiful lady, “and Monsignor Darcy will understand him as he understood me.”	fun to be around

quite the cardinal’s right-hand man	Eventually she had decided to marry for background, and the young pagan from Asheville had gone through a spiritual crisis, joined the Catholic Church, and was now—Monsignor Darcy. “Indeed, Mrs. Blaine, he is still delightful company—quite the cardinal’s right-hand man.” “Amory will go to him one day, I know,” breathed the beautiful lady, “and Monsignor Darcy will understand him as he understood me.”	a very important assistant to the cardinal

go to him one day, I know,” breathed the beautiful lady, “and Monsignor Darcy will understand him as he understood me.”	“Indeed, Mrs. Blaine, he is still delightful company—quite the cardinal’s right-hand man.” “Amory will go to him one day, I know,” breathed the beautiful lady, “and Monsignor Darcy will understand him as he understood me.” Amory became thirteen, rather tall and slender, and more than ever on to his Celtic mother.	I know he'll go to him someday," the beautiful lady said softly, "and Monsignor Darcy will understand him the way he understood me.

more than ever on to his Celtic mother.	“Amory will go to him one day, I know,” breathed the beautiful lady, “and Monsignor Darcy will understand him as he understood me.” Amory became thirteen, rather tall and slender, and more than ever on to his Celtic mother. He had tutored occasionally—the idea being that he was to “keep up,” at each place “taking up the work where he left off,” yet as no tutor ever found the place he left off, his mind was still in very good shape.	resembling his Celtic mother more than ever.

idea being that he was to “keep up,” at each place “taking up the work where he left off,” yet as no tutor ever found the place he left off, his mind was still in very good shape.	Amory became thirteen, rather tall and slender, and more than ever on to his Celtic mother. He had tutored occasionally—the idea being that he was to “keep up,” at each place “taking up the work where he left off,” yet as no tutor ever found the place he left off, his mind was still in very good shape. What a few more years of this life would have made of him is problematical.	The plan was for him to stay on track with his studies, picking up where he supposedly left off each time, but since no tutor could ever figure out where that was, his mind remained sharp.

made of him is problematical.	He had tutored occasionally—the idea being that he was to “keep up,” at each place “taking up the work where he left off,” yet as no tutor ever found the place he left off, his mind was still in very good shape. What a few more years of this life would have made of him is problematical. However, four hours out from land, Italy bound, with Beatrice, his appendix burst, probably from too many meals in bed, and after a series of frantic telegrams to Europe and America, to the amazement of the passengers the great ship slowly wheeled around and returned to New York to deposit Amory at the pier.	what he would become is uncertain.

passengers the great ship slowly wheeled around and returned to New York to deposit Amory at the pier.	What a few more years of this life would have made of him is problematical. However, four hours out from land, Italy bound, with Beatrice, his appendix burst, probably from too many meals in bed, and after a series of frantic telegrams to Europe and America, to the amazement of the passengers the great ship slowly wheeled around and returned to New York to deposit Amory at the pier. You will admit that if it was not life it was magnificent.	the ship turned around and went back to New York to drop Amory off at the dock, which surprised the passengers.

frantic telegrams	What a few more years of this life would have made of him is problematical. However, four hours out from land, Italy bound, with Beatrice, his appendix burst, probably from too many meals in bed, and after a series of frantic telegrams to Europe and America, to the amazement of the passengers the great ship slowly wheeled around and returned to New York to deposit Amory at the pier. You will admit that if it was not life it was magnificent.	desperate telegrams

resemblance to delirium tremens, and Amory was left in Minneapolis, destined to spend the ensuing two years with his aunt and uncle.	You will admit that if it was not life it was magnificent. After the operation Beatrice had a nervous breakdown that bore a suspicious resemblance to delirium tremens, and Amory was left in Minneapolis, destined to spend the ensuing two years with his aunt and uncle. There the crude, vulgar air of Western civilization first catches him—in his underwear, so to speak.	looked a lot like withdrawal, and Amory was left in Minneapolis, where he was going to live with his aunt and uncle for the next two years.

the ensuing two years	You will admit that if it was not life it was magnificent. After the operation Beatrice had a nervous breakdown that bore a suspicious resemblance to delirium tremens, and Amory was left in Minneapolis, destined to spend the ensuing two years with his aunt and uncle. There the crude, vulgar air of Western civilization first catches him—in his underwear, so to speak.	the next two years

a suspicious resemblance	You will admit that if it was not life it was magnificent. After the operation Beatrice had a nervous breakdown that bore a suspicious resemblance to delirium tremens, and Amory was left in Minneapolis, destined to spend the ensuing two years with his aunt and uncle. There the crude, vulgar air of Western civilization first catches him—in his underwear, so to speak.	looked a lot like

delirium tremens	You will admit that if it was not life it was magnificent. After the operation Beatrice had a nervous breakdown that bore a suspicious resemblance to delirium tremens, and Amory was left in Minneapolis, destined to spend the ensuing two years with his aunt and uncle. There the crude, vulgar air of Western civilization first catches him—in his underwear, so to speak.	withdrawal symptoms from alcohol

the crude, vulgar air	After the operation Beatrice had a nervous breakdown that bore a suspicious resemblance to delirium tremens, and Amory was left in Minneapolis, destined to spend the ensuing two years with his aunt and uncle. There the crude, vulgar air of Western civilization first catches him—in his underwear, so to speak.	the raw, unrefined atmosphere

curled when he read it.	His lip curled when he read it. “I am going to have a bobbing party,” it said, “on Thursday, December the seventeenth, at five o’clock, and I would like it very much if you could come.	curled when he read it.

five o’clock	His lip curled when he read it. “I am going to have a bobbing party,” it said, “on Thursday, December the seventeenth, at five o’clock, and I would like it very much if you could come. Yours truly, Myra St. Claire.”	5 PM

said, “on Thursday, December the seventeenth, at five o’clock, and I would like it very much if you could come.	His lip curled when he read it. “I am going to have a bobbing party,” it said, “on Thursday, December the seventeenth, at five o’clock, and I would like it very much if you could come. Yours truly, Myra St. Claire.”	said, "on Thursday, December 17th, at 5:00, and I'd really like you to come.

Yours truly, Myra St. Claire	“I am going to have a bobbing party,” it said, “on Thursday, December the seventeenth, at five o’clock, and I would like it very much if you could come. Yours truly, Myra St. Claire.” He had been two months in Minneapolis, and his chief struggle had been the concealing from “the other guys at school” how particularly superior he felt himself to be, yet this conviction was built upon shifting sands.	Sincerely, Myra St. Claire

guys at school” how particularly superior he felt himself to be, yet this conviction was built upon shifting sands.	Yours truly, Myra St. Claire.” He had been two months in Minneapolis, and his chief struggle had been the concealing from “the other guys at school” how particularly superior he felt himself to be, yet this conviction was built upon shifting sands. He had shown off one day in French class (he was in senior French class) to the utter confusion of Mr. Reardon, whose accent Amory damned contemptuously, and to the delight of the class.	the other guys at school" how much better he thought he was than them, but this belief wasn't very solid.

confusion of Mr. Reardon, whose accent Amory damned contemptuously, and to the delight of the class.	He had been two months in Minneapolis, and his chief struggle had been the concealing from “the other guys at school” how particularly superior he felt himself to be, yet this conviction was built upon shifting sands. He had shown off one day in French class (he was in senior French class) to the utter confusion of Mr. Reardon, whose accent Amory damned contemptuously, and to the delight of the class. Mr. Reardon, who had spent several weeks in Paris ten years before, took his revenge on the verbs, whenever he had his book open.	confusing Mr. Reardon, whose accent Amory criticized harshly, which pleased the class.

the utter confusion	He had been two months in Minneapolis, and his chief struggle had been the concealing from “the other guys at school” how particularly superior he felt himself to be, yet this conviction was built upon shifting sands. He had shown off one day in French class (he was in senior French class) to the utter confusion of Mr. Reardon, whose accent Amory damned contemptuously, and to the delight of the class. Mr. Reardon, who had spent several weeks in Paris ten years before, took his revenge on the verbs, whenever he had his book open.	complete bewilderment

took his revenge on the verbs, whenever he had his book open.	He had shown off one day in French class (he was in senior French class) to the utter confusion of Mr. Reardon, whose accent Amory damned contemptuously, and to the delight of the class. Mr. Reardon, who had spent several weeks in Paris ten years before, took his revenge on the verbs, whenever he had his book open. But another time Amory showed off in history class, with quite disastrous results, for the boys there were his own age, and they shrilled innuendoes at each other all the following week: “Aw—I b’lieve, doncherknow, the Umuricun revolution was lawgely an affair of the middul clawses,” or “Washington came of very good blood—aw, quite good—I b’lieve.”	punished them on the verbs whenever he could.

quite disastrous results	Mr. Reardon, who had spent several weeks in Paris ten years before, took his revenge on the verbs, whenever he had his book open. But another time Amory showed off in history class, with quite disastrous results, for the boys there were his own age, and they shrilled innuendoes at each other all the following week: “Aw—I b’lieve, doncherknow, the Umuricun revolution was lawgely an affair of the middul clawses,” or “Washington came of very good blood—aw, quite good—I b’lieve.” Amory ingeniously tried to retrieve himself by blundering on purpose.	very bad consequences

the middul clawses	Mr. Reardon, who had spent several weeks in Paris ten years before, took his revenge on the verbs, whenever he had his book open. But another time Amory showed off in history class, with quite disastrous results, for the boys there were his own age, and they shrilled innuendoes at each other all the following week: “Aw—I b’lieve, doncherknow, the Umuricun revolution was lawgely an affair of the middul clawses,” or “Washington came of very good blood—aw, quite good—I b’lieve.” Amory ingeniously tried to retrieve himself by blundering on purpose.	the middle classes

the Umuricun revolution	Mr. Reardon, who had spent several weeks in Paris ten years before, took his revenge on the verbs, whenever he had his book open. But another time Amory showed off in history class, with quite disastrous results, for the boys there were his own age, and they shrilled innuendoes at each other all the following week: “Aw—I b’lieve, doncherknow, the Umuricun revolution was lawgely an affair of the middul clawses,” or “Washington came of very good blood—aw, quite good—I b’lieve.” Amory ingeniously tried to retrieve himself by blundering on purpose.	the American revolution

came of very good blood—aw, quite good—I b’lieve.”	Mr. Reardon, who had spent several weeks in Paris ten years before, took his revenge on the verbs, whenever he had his book open. But another time Amory showed off in history class, with quite disastrous results, for the boys there were his own age, and they shrilled innuendoes at each other all the following week: “Aw—I b’lieve, doncherknow, the Umuricun revolution was lawgely an affair of the middul clawses,” or “Washington came of very good blood—aw, quite good—I b’lieve.” Amory ingeniously tried to retrieve himself by blundering on purpose.	came from a very good family—oh, very good indeed, I think.

blundering on purpose.	But another time Amory showed off in history class, with quite disastrous results, for the boys there were his own age, and they shrilled innuendoes at each other all the following week: “Aw—I b’lieve, doncherknow, the Umuricun revolution was lawgely an affair of the middul clawses,” or “Washington came of very good blood—aw, quite good—I b’lieve.” Amory ingeniously tried to retrieve himself by blundering on purpose. Two years before he had commenced a history of the United States which, though it only got as far as the Colonial Wars, had been pronounced by his mother completely enchanting.	making mistakes on purpose.

pronounced by his mother completely enchanting.	Amory ingeniously tried to retrieve himself by blundering on purpose. Two years before he had commenced a history of the United States which, though it only got as far as the Colonial Wars, had been pronounced by his mother completely enchanting. His chief disadvantage lay in athletics, but as soon as he discovered that it was the touchstone of power and popularity at school, he began to make furious, persistent efforts to excel in the winter sports, and with his ankles aching and bending in spite of his efforts, he skated valiantly around the Lorelie rink every afternoon, wondering how soon he would be able to carry a hockey-stick without getting it inexplicably tangled in his skates.	His mother thought it was absolutely wonderful.

furious, persistent efforts	Two years before he had commenced a history of the United States which, though it only got as far as the Colonial Wars, had been pronounced by his mother completely enchanting. His chief disadvantage lay in athletics, but as soon as he discovered that it was the touchstone of power and popularity at school, he began to make furious, persistent efforts to excel in the winter sports, and with his ankles aching and bending in spite of his efforts, he skated valiantly around the Lorelie rink every afternoon, wondering how soon he would be able to carry a hockey-stick without getting it inexplicably tangled in his skates. The invitation to Miss Myra St. Claire’s bobbing party spent the morning in his coat pocket, where it had an intense physical affair with a dusty piece of peanut brittle.	intense, unwavering attempts

the Lorelie rink	Two years before he had commenced a history of the United States which, though it only got as far as the Colonial Wars, had been pronounced by his mother completely enchanting. His chief disadvantage lay in athletics, but as soon as he discovered that it was the touchstone of power and popularity at school, he began to make furious, persistent efforts to excel in the winter sports, and with his ankles aching and bending in spite of his efforts, he skated valiantly around the Lorelie rink every afternoon, wondering how soon he would be able to carry a hockey-stick without getting it inexplicably tangled in his skates. The invitation to Miss Myra St. Claire’s bobbing party spent the morning in his coat pocket, where it had an intense physical affair with a dusty piece of peanut brittle.	The Lorelie ice rink

excel in the winter sports, and with his ankles aching and bending in spite of his efforts, he skated valiantly around the Lorelie rink every afternoon, wondering how soon he would be able to carry a hockey-stick without getting it inexplicably tangled in his skates.	Two years before he had commenced a history of the United States which, though it only got as far as the Colonial Wars, had been pronounced by his mother completely enchanting. His chief disadvantage lay in athletics, but as soon as he discovered that it was the touchstone of power and popularity at school, he began to make furious, persistent efforts to excel in the winter sports, and with his ankles aching and bending in spite of his efforts, he skated valiantly around the Lorelie rink every afternoon, wondering how soon he would be able to carry a hockey-stick without getting it inexplicably tangled in his skates. The invitation to Miss Myra St. Claire’s bobbing party spent the morning in his coat pocket, where it had an intense physical affair with a dusty piece of peanut brittle.	be good at winter sports. Despite his aching and weak ankles, he bravely skated around the Lorelie rink every afternoon, wondering how long it would take before he could carry a hockey stick without tripping over his skates.

His chief disadvantage	Two years before he had commenced a history of the United States which, though it only got as far as the Colonial Wars, had been pronounced by his mother completely enchanting. His chief disadvantage lay in athletics, but as soon as he discovered that it was the touchstone of power and popularity at school, he began to make furious, persistent efforts to excel in the winter sports, and with his ankles aching and bending in spite of his efforts, he skated valiantly around the Lorelie rink every afternoon, wondering how soon he would be able to carry a hockey-stick without getting it inexplicably tangled in his skates. The invitation to Miss Myra St. Claire’s bobbing party spent the morning in his coat pocket, where it had an intense physical affair with a dusty piece of peanut brittle.	His main weakness

a dusty piece	His chief disadvantage lay in athletics, but as soon as he discovered that it was the touchstone of power and popularity at school, he began to make furious, persistent efforts to excel in the winter sports, and with his ankles aching and bending in spite of his efforts, he skated valiantly around the Lorelie rink every afternoon, wondering how soon he would be able to carry a hockey-stick without getting it inexplicably tangled in his skates. The invitation to Miss Myra St. Claire’s bobbing party spent the morning in his coat pocket, where it had an intense physical affair with a dusty piece of peanut brittle. During the afternoon he brought it to light with a sigh, and after some consideration and a preliminary draft in the back of Collar and Daniel’s First-Year Latin, composed an answer: My dear Miss St. Claire: Your truly charming envitation for the evening of next Thursday evening was truly delightful to receive this morning.	a dirty piece

affair with a dusty piece of peanut brittle.	His chief disadvantage lay in athletics, but as soon as he discovered that it was the touchstone of power and popularity at school, he began to make furious, persistent efforts to excel in the winter sports, and with his ankles aching and bending in spite of his efforts, he skated valiantly around the Lorelie rink every afternoon, wondering how soon he would be able to carry a hockey-stick without getting it inexplicably tangled in his skates. The invitation to Miss Myra St. Claire’s bobbing party spent the morning in his coat pocket, where it had an intense physical affair with a dusty piece of peanut brittle. During the afternoon he brought it to light with a sigh, and after some consideration and a preliminary draft in the back of Collar and Daniel’s First-Year Latin, composed an answer: My dear Miss St. Claire: Your truly charming envitation for the evening of next Thursday evening was truly delightful to receive this morning.	got stuck to a dusty piece of peanut brittle.

Miss Myra St. Claire’s bobbing party	His chief disadvantage lay in athletics, but as soon as he discovered that it was the touchstone of power and popularity at school, he began to make furious, persistent efforts to excel in the winter sports, and with his ankles aching and bending in spite of his efforts, he skated valiantly around the Lorelie rink every afternoon, wondering how soon he would be able to carry a hockey-stick without getting it inexplicably tangled in his skates. The invitation to Miss Myra St. Claire’s bobbing party spent the morning in his coat pocket, where it had an intense physical affair with a dusty piece of peanut brittle. During the afternoon he brought it to light with a sigh, and after some consideration and a preliminary draft in the back of Collar and Daniel’s First-Year Latin, composed an answer: My dear Miss St. Claire: Your truly charming envitation for the evening of next Thursday evening was truly delightful to receive this morning.	Myra St. Claire's bobbing party

Daniel’s First-Year Latin	The invitation to Miss Myra St. Claire’s bobbing party spent the morning in his coat pocket, where it had an intense physical affair with a dusty piece of peanut brittle. During the afternoon he brought it to light with a sigh, and after some consideration and a preliminary draft in the back of Collar and Daniel’s First-Year Latin, composed an answer: My dear Miss St. Claire: Your truly charming envitation for the evening of next Thursday evening was truly delightful to receive this morning. I will be charm and inchanted indeed to present my compliments on next Thursday evening.	Daniel's first year Latin book

back of Collar and Daniel’s First-Year Latin, composed an answer: My dear Miss St. Claire: Your truly charming envitation for the evening of next Thursday evening was truly delightful to receive this morning.	The invitation to Miss Myra St. Claire’s bobbing party spent the morning in his coat pocket, where it had an intense physical affair with a dusty piece of peanut brittle. During the afternoon he brought it to light with a sigh, and after some consideration and a preliminary draft in the back of Collar and Daniel’s First-Year Latin, composed an answer: My dear Miss St. Claire: Your truly charming envitation for the evening of next Thursday evening was truly delightful to receive this morning. I will be charm and inchanted indeed to present my compliments on next Thursday evening.	wrote an answer: Dear Miss St. Claire: Your invitation for next Thursday was delightful to receive this morning.

Your truly charming envitation	The invitation to Miss Myra St. Claire’s bobbing party spent the morning in his coat pocket, where it had an intense physical affair with a dusty piece of peanut brittle. During the afternoon he brought it to light with a sigh, and after some consideration and a preliminary draft in the back of Collar and Daniel’s First-Year Latin, composed an answer: My dear Miss St. Claire: Your truly charming envitation for the evening of next Thursday evening was truly delightful to receive this morning. I will be charm and inchanted indeed to present my compliments on next Thursday evening.	Your very lovely invitation

My dear Miss St. Claire	The invitation to Miss Myra St. Claire’s bobbing party spent the morning in his coat pocket, where it had an intense physical affair with a dusty piece of peanut brittle. During the afternoon he brought it to light with a sigh, and after some consideration and a preliminary draft in the back of Collar and Daniel’s First-Year Latin, composed an answer: My dear Miss St. Claire: Your truly charming envitation for the evening of next Thursday evening was truly delightful to receive this morning. I will be charm and inchanted indeed to present my compliments on next Thursday evening.	Dear Miss St. Claire

present my compliments on next Thursday evening.	During the afternoon he brought it to light with a sigh, and after some consideration and a preliminary draft in the back of Collar and Daniel’s First-Year Latin, composed an answer: My dear Miss St. Claire: Your truly charming envitation for the evening of next Thursday evening was truly delightful to receive this morning. I will be charm and inchanted indeed to present my compliments on next Thursday evening. Faithfully, Amory Blaine.	be there next Thursday.

Faithfully, Amory Blaine	I will be charm and inchanted indeed to present my compliments on next Thursday evening. Faithfully, Amory Blaine. On Thursday, therefore, he walked pensively along the slippery, shovel-scraped sidewalks, and came in sight of Myra’s house, on the half-hour after five, a lateness which he fancied his mother would have favored.	Sincerely, Amory Blaine

the slippery, shovel-scraped sidewalks	Faithfully, Amory Blaine. On Thursday, therefore, he walked pensively along the slippery, shovel-scraped sidewalks, and came in sight of Myra’s house, on the half-hour after five, a lateness which he fancied his mother would have favored. He waited on the doorstep with his eyes nonchalantly half-closed, and planned his entrance with precision.	the icy, shoveled sidewalks

Myra’s house	Faithfully, Amory Blaine. On Thursday, therefore, he walked pensively along the slippery, shovel-scraped sidewalks, and came in sight of Myra’s house, on the half-hour after five, a lateness which he fancied his mother would have favored. He waited on the doorstep with his eyes nonchalantly half-closed, and planned his entrance with precision.	Myra's house

walked pensively along the slippery, shovel-scraped sidewalks, and came in sight of Myra’s house, on the half-hour after five, a lateness which he fancied his mother would have favored.	Faithfully, Amory Blaine. On Thursday, therefore, he walked pensively along the slippery, shovel-scraped sidewalks, and came in sight of Myra’s house, on the half-hour after five, a lateness which he fancied his mother would have favored. He waited on the doorstep with his eyes nonchalantly half-closed, and planned his entrance with precision.	walked thoughtfully on the icy, shoveled sidewalks, and saw Myra’s house at about 5:30, a slight tardiness he thought his mother would approve of.

waited on the doorstep with his eyes nonchalantly half-closed, and planned his entrance with precision.	On Thursday, therefore, he walked pensively along the slippery, shovel-scraped sidewalks, and came in sight of Myra’s house, on the half-hour after five, a lateness which he fancied his mother would have favored. He waited on the doorstep with his eyes nonchalantly half-closed, and planned his entrance with precision. He would cross the floor, not too hastily, to Mrs. St. Claire, and say with exactly the correct modulation: “My dear Mrs. St. Claire, I’m frightfully sorry to be late, but my maid”—he paused there and realized he would be quoting—“but my uncle and I had to see a fella—Yes, I’ve met your enchanting daughter at dancing-school.”	waited on the doorstep with his eyes casually half-closed, carefully planning how he would enter.

exactly the correct modulation	He waited on the doorstep with his eyes nonchalantly half-closed, and planned his entrance with precision. He would cross the floor, not too hastily, to Mrs. St. Claire, and say with exactly the correct modulation: “My dear Mrs. St. Claire, I’m frightfully sorry to be late, but my maid”—he paused there and realized he would be quoting—“but my uncle and I had to see a fella—Yes, I’ve met your enchanting daughter at dancing-school.” Then he would shake hands, using that slight, half-foreign bow, with all the starchy little females, and nod to the fellas who would be standing ’round, paralyzed into rigid groups for mutual protection.	the perfect tone of voice

your enchanting daughter	He waited on the doorstep with his eyes nonchalantly half-closed, and planned his entrance with precision. He would cross the floor, not too hastily, to Mrs. St. Claire, and say with exactly the correct modulation: “My dear Mrs. St. Claire, I’m frightfully sorry to be late, but my maid”—he paused there and realized he would be quoting—“but my uncle and I had to see a fella—Yes, I’ve met your enchanting daughter at dancing-school.” Then he would shake hands, using that slight, half-foreign bow, with all the starchy little females, and nod to the fellas who would be standing ’round, paralyzed into rigid groups for mutual protection.	your lovely daughter

cross the floor, not too hastily, to Mrs. St. Claire, and say with exactly the correct modulation: “My dear Mrs. St. Claire, I’m frightfully sorry to be late, but my maid”—he paused there and realized he would be quoting—“but my uncle and I had to see a fella—Yes, I’ve met your enchanting daughter at dancing-school.”	He waited on the doorstep with his eyes nonchalantly half-closed, and planned his entrance with precision. He would cross the floor, not too hastily, to Mrs. St. Claire, and say with exactly the correct modulation: “My dear Mrs. St. Claire, I’m frightfully sorry to be late, but my maid”—he paused there and realized he would be quoting—“but my uncle and I had to see a fella—Yes, I’ve met your enchanting daughter at dancing-school.” Then he would shake hands, using that slight, half-foreign bow, with all the starchy little females, and nod to the fellas who would be standing ’round, paralyzed into rigid groups for mutual protection.	walk over to Mrs. St. Claire without rushing, and say in just the right tone: "My dear Mrs. St. Claire, I'm terribly sorry I'm late, but my maid"—he stopped, realizing he'd be quoting someone—"but my uncle and I had to see a guy—Yes, I've met your lovely daughter at dancing school."

My dear Mrs. St. Claire	He waited on the doorstep with his eyes nonchalantly half-closed, and planned his entrance with precision. He would cross the floor, not too hastily, to Mrs. St. Claire, and say with exactly the correct modulation: “My dear Mrs. St. Claire, I’m frightfully sorry to be late, but my maid”—he paused there and realized he would be quoting—“but my uncle and I had to see a fella—Yes, I’ve met your enchanting daughter at dancing-school.” Then he would shake hands, using that slight, half-foreign bow, with all the starchy little females, and nod to the fellas who would be standing ’round, paralyzed into rigid groups for mutual protection.	My dear Mrs. St. Claire

all the starchy little females	He would cross the floor, not too hastily, to Mrs. St. Claire, and say with exactly the correct modulation: “My dear Mrs. St. Claire, I’m frightfully sorry to be late, but my maid”—he paused there and realized he would be quoting—“but my uncle and I had to see a fella—Yes, I’ve met your enchanting daughter at dancing-school.” Then he would shake hands, using that slight, half-foreign bow, with all the starchy little females, and nod to the fellas who would be standing ’round, paralyzed into rigid groups for mutual protection. A butler (one of the three in Minneapolis) swung open the door.	all the prim and proper young women

rigid groups	He would cross the floor, not too hastily, to Mrs. St. Claire, and say with exactly the correct modulation: “My dear Mrs. St. Claire, I’m frightfully sorry to be late, but my maid”—he paused there and realized he would be quoting—“but my uncle and I had to see a fella—Yes, I’ve met your enchanting daughter at dancing-school.” Then he would shake hands, using that slight, half-foreign bow, with all the starchy little females, and nod to the fellas who would be standing ’round, paralyzed into rigid groups for mutual protection. A butler (one of the three in Minneapolis) swung open the door.	stiff groups

divested himself of cap and coat.	A butler (one of the three in Minneapolis) swung open the door. Amory stepped inside and divested himself of cap and coat. He was mildly surprised not to hear the shrill squawk of conversation from the next room, and he decided it must be quite formal.	took off his hat and coat.

the shrill squawk	Amory stepped inside and divested himself of cap and coat. He was mildly surprised not to hear the shrill squawk of conversation from the next room, and he decided it must be quite formal. He approved of that—as he approved of the butler.	the loud, unpleasant chatter

squawk of conversation from the next room, and he decided it must be quite formal.	Amory stepped inside and divested himself of cap and coat. He was mildly surprised not to hear the shrill squawk of conversation from the next room, and he decided it must be quite formal. He approved of that—as he approved of the butler.	loud chatter from the next room, and he figured it must be a serious occasion.

grinned horribly.	“Miss Myra,” he said. To his surprise the butler grinned horribly. “Oh, yeah,” he declared, “she’s here.”	grinned in a nasty way.

failure to be cockney was ruining his standing.	“Oh, yeah,” he declared, “she’s here.” He was unaware that his failure to be cockney was ruining his standing. Amory considered him coldly.	not sounding like a Cockney was hurting his reputation.

continued the butler, his voice rising unnecessarily, “she’s the only one what is here.	Amory considered him coldly. “But,” continued the butler, his voice rising unnecessarily, “she’s the only one what is here. The party’s gone.”	continued the butler, his voice rising unnecessarily, "she's the only one who's here."

gasped in sudden horror.	The party’s gone.” Amory gasped in sudden horror. “What?”	suddenly horrified.

been waitin’ for Amory Blaine.	“What?” “She’s been waitin’ for Amory Blaine. That’s you, ain’t it?	Waiting for Amory Blaine.

go after ’em in the Packard.”	That’s you, ain’t it? Her mother says that if you showed up by five-thirty you two was to go after ’em in the Packard.” Amory’s despair was crystallized by the appearance of Myra herself, bundled to the ears in a polo coat, her face plainly sulky, her voice pleasant only with difficulty.	chase them in the Packard.

Amory’s despair	Her mother says that if you showed up by five-thirty you two was to go after ’em in the Packard.” Amory’s despair was crystallized by the appearance of Myra herself, bundled to the ears in a polo coat, her face plainly sulky, her voice pleasant only with difficulty. “ ’Lo, Amory.”	Amory's hopelessness

state of his vitality.	“ ’Lo, Myra.” He had described the state of his vitality. “Well—you got here, anyways.”	how he was doing.

know about the auto accident,” he romanced.	“Well—I’ll tell you. I guess you don’t know about the auto accident,” he romanced. Myra’s eyes opened wide.	know about the car accident," he said, exaggerating.

Myra’s eyes	I guess you don’t know about the auto accident,” he romanced. Myra’s eyes opened wide. “Who was it to?”	Myra's eyes.

“Your uncle?”—alarm	Amory paused and then nodded. “Your uncle?”—alarm. “Oh, no just a horse—a sorta gray horse.”	"Your uncle?"—alarm

a sorta gray horse	“Your uncle?”—alarm. “Oh, no just a horse—a sorta gray horse.” At this point the Erse butler snickered.	a kind of gray horse

horse—a sorta gray horse.”	“Your uncle?”—alarm. “Oh, no just a horse—a sorta gray horse.” At this point the Erse butler snickered.	horse—a kind of gray horse.

the Erse butler	“Oh, no just a horse—a sorta gray horse.” At this point the Erse butler snickered. “Probably killed the engine,” he suggested.	the Irish butler

put him on the rack without a scruple.	“Probably killed the engine,” he suggested. Amory would have put him on the rack without a scruple. “We’ll go now,” said Myra coolly.	torture him without any hesitation.

ordered for five and everybody was here, so we couldn’t wait—” “Well, I couldn’t help it, could I?”	“We’ll go now,” said Myra coolly. “You see, Amory, the bobs were ordered for five and everybody was here, so we couldn’t wait—” “Well, I couldn’t help it, could I?” “So mama said for me to wait till ha’past five.	ordered for five o'clock, and everyone arrived, so we couldn't wait." "Well, it wasn't my fault, was it?"

wait till ha’past five.	“You see, Amory, the bobs were ordered for five and everybody was here, so we couldn’t wait—” “Well, I couldn’t help it, could I?” “So mama said for me to wait till ha’past five. We’ll catch the bobs before it gets to the Minnehaha Club, Amory.”	wait until half past five.

the Minnehaha Club	“So mama said for me to wait till ha’past five. We’ll catch the bobs before it gets to the Minnehaha Club, Amory.” Amory’s shredded poise dropped from him.	the Minnehaha Club

gets to the Minnehaha Club, Amory.”	“So mama said for me to wait till ha’past five. We’ll catch the bobs before it gets to the Minnehaha Club, Amory.” Amory’s shredded poise dropped from him.	gets to the Minnehaha Club, Amory.

Amory’s shredded poise	We’ll catch the bobs before it gets to the Minnehaha Club, Amory.” Amory’s shredded poise dropped from him. He pictured the happy party jingling along snowy streets, the appearance of the limousine, the horrible public descent of him and Myra before sixty reproachful eyes, his apology—a real one this time.	Amory's lost composure

sixty reproachful eyes	Amory’s shredded poise dropped from him. He pictured the happy party jingling along snowy streets, the appearance of the limousine, the horrible public descent of him and Myra before sixty reproachful eyes, his apology—a real one this time. He sighed aloud.	sixty disapproving eyes

snowy streets	Amory’s shredded poise dropped from him. He pictured the happy party jingling along snowy streets, the appearance of the limousine, the horrible public descent of him and Myra before sixty reproachful eyes, his apology—a real one this time. He sighed aloud.	snowy streets

the horrible public descent	Amory’s shredded poise dropped from him. He pictured the happy party jingling along snowy streets, the appearance of the limousine, the horrible public descent of him and Myra before sixty reproachful eyes, his apology—a real one this time. He sighed aloud.	the awful public humiliation

limousine, the horrible public descent of him and Myra before sixty reproachful eyes, his apology—a real one this time.	Amory’s shredded poise dropped from him. He pictured the happy party jingling along snowy streets, the appearance of the limousine, the horrible public descent of him and Myra before sixty reproachful eyes, his apology—a real one this time. He sighed aloud.	the limousine, the awful moment of him and Myra getting out in front of everyone's disapproving stares, and his sincere apology.

catch up with ’em before they get there?”	I was just yawning. Are we going to surely catch up with ’em before they get there?” He was encouraging a faint hope that they might slip into the Minnehaha Club and meet the others there, be found in blasé seclusion before the fire and quite regain his lost attitude.	Catch them before they arrive?

blasé seclusion	Are we going to surely catch up with ’em before they get there?” He was encouraging a faint hope that they might slip into the Minnehaha Club and meet the others there, be found in blasé seclusion before the fire and quite regain his lost attitude. “Oh, sure Mike, we’ll catch ’em all right—let’s hurry.”	unbothered privacy

found in blasé seclusion before the fire and quite regain his lost attitude.	Are we going to surely catch up with ’em before they get there?” He was encouraging a faint hope that they might slip into the Minnehaha Club and meet the others there, be found in blasé seclusion before the fire and quite regain his lost attitude. “Oh, sure Mike, we’ll catch ’em all right—let’s hurry.”	be found relaxing coolly by the fire and get his confidence back.

the Minnehaha Club	Are we going to surely catch up with ’em before they get there?” He was encouraging a faint hope that they might slip into the Minnehaha Club and meet the others there, be found in blasé seclusion before the fire and quite regain his lost attitude. “Oh, sure Mike, we’ll catch ’em all right—let’s hurry.”	Minnehaha Club

a faint hope	Are we going to surely catch up with ’em before they get there?” He was encouraging a faint hope that they might slip into the Minnehaha Club and meet the others there, be found in blasé seclusion before the fire and quite regain his lost attitude. “Oh, sure Mike, we’ll catch ’em all right—let’s hurry.”	a small hope

stepped into the machine he hurriedly slapped the paint of diplomacy over a rather boxlike plan he had conceived.	He became conscious of his stomach. As they stepped into the machine he hurriedly slapped the paint of diplomacy over a rather boxlike plan he had conceived. It was based upon some “trade-lasts” gleaned at dancing-school, to the effect that he was “awful good-looking and English, sort of.”	got into the car, he quickly tried to make his awkward plan sound better.

a rather boxlike plan	He became conscious of his stomach. As they stepped into the machine he hurriedly slapped the paint of diplomacy over a rather boxlike plan he had conceived. It was based upon some “trade-lasts” gleaned at dancing-school, to the effect that he was “awful good-looking and English, sort of.”	a simple, clumsy plan

based upon some “trade-lasts” gleaned at dancing-school, to the effect that he was “awful good-looking and English, sort of.”	As they stepped into the machine he hurriedly slapped the paint of diplomacy over a rather boxlike plan he had conceived. It was based upon some “trade-lasts” gleaned at dancing-school, to the effect that he was “awful good-looking and English, sort of.” “Myra,” he said, lowering his voice and choosing his words carefully, “I beg a thousand pardons.	based on some hints he'd picked up at dancing-school, suggesting he was "quite good-looking and English, in a way."

a thousand pardons	It was based upon some “trade-lasts” gleaned at dancing-school, to the effect that he was “awful good-looking and English, sort of.” “Myra,” he said, lowering his voice and choosing his words carefully, “I beg a thousand pardons. Can you ever forgive me?”	I'm very sorry.

said, lowering his voice and choosing his words carefully, “I beg a thousand pardons.	It was based upon some “trade-lasts” gleaned at dancing-school, to the effect that he was “awful good-looking and English, sort of.” “Myra,” he said, lowering his voice and choosing his words carefully, “I beg a thousand pardons. Can you ever forgive me?”	said, speaking softly and deliberately, "I'm so sorry.

quintessence of romance.	Can you ever forgive me?” She regarded him gravely, his intent green eyes, his mouth, that to her thirteen-year-old, arrow-collar taste was the quintessence of romance. Yes, Myra could forgive him very easily.	the perfect example of romance.

her thirteen-year-old, arrow-collar taste	Can you ever forgive me?” She regarded him gravely, his intent green eyes, his mouth, that to her thirteen-year-old, arrow-collar taste was the quintessence of romance. Yes, Myra could forgive him very easily.	the kind of style a thirteen-year-old would find attractive

faux pas	“I’m diff’runt. I don’t know why I make faux pas. ’Cause I don’t care, I s’pose.”	social blunder

care, I s’pose.”	I don’t know why I make faux pas. ’Cause I don’t care, I s’pose.” Then, recklessly: “I been smoking too much.	care, I guess.

t’bacca heart	Then, recklessly: “I been smoking too much. I’ve got t’bacca heart.” Myra pictured an all-night tobacco debauch, with Amory pale and reeling from the effect of nicotined lungs.	tobacco heart

pictured an all-night tobacco debauch, with Amory pale and reeling from the effect of nicotined lungs.	I’ve got t’bacca heart.” Myra pictured an all-night tobacco debauch, with Amory pale and reeling from the effect of nicotined lungs. She gave a little gasp.	imagined Amory spending the whole night using tobacco, and becoming pale and unsteady from smoking too much.

an all-night tobacco debauch	I’ve got t’bacca heart.” Myra pictured an all-night tobacco debauch, with Amory pale and reeling from the effect of nicotined lungs. She gave a little gasp.	a tobacco binge lasting all night

nicotined lungs	I’ve got t’bacca heart.” Myra pictured an all-night tobacco debauch, with Amory pale and reeling from the effect of nicotined lungs. She gave a little gasp.	Lungs damaged by nicotine

a little gasp	Myra pictured an all-night tobacco debauch, with Amory pale and reeling from the effect of nicotined lungs. She gave a little gasp. “Oh, Amory, don’t smoke.	a little gasp

Oh, Amory	She gave a little gasp. “Oh, Amory, don’t smoke. You’ll stunt your growth!”	Oh, Amory

the burlesque show	I got the habit. I’ve done a lot of things that if my fambly knew”—he hesitated, giving her imagination time to picture dark horrors—“I went to the burlesque show last week.” Myra was quite overcome.	the burlesque show

hesitated, giving her imagination time to picture dark horrors—“I went to the burlesque show last week.”	I got the habit. I’ve done a lot of things that if my fambly knew”—he hesitated, giving her imagination time to picture dark horrors—“I went to the burlesque show last week.” Myra was quite overcome.	paused, letting her imagine terrible things—"I went to the burlesque show last week."

my fambly knew”—he	I got the habit. I’ve done a lot of things that if my fambly knew”—he hesitated, giving her imagination time to picture dark horrors—“I went to the burlesque show last week.” Myra was quite overcome.	my family knew"

rush of sentiment.	He turned the green eyes on her again. “You’re the only girl in town I like much,” he exclaimed in a rush of sentiment. “You’re simpatico.”	sudden burst of feeling.

Thick dusk	Myra was not sure that she was, but it sounded stylish though vaguely improper. Thick dusk had descended outside, and as the limousine made a sudden turn she was jolted against him; their hands touched. “You shouldn’t smoke, Amory,” she whispered.	It was getting dark.

turn she was jolted against him; their hands touched.	Myra was not sure that she was, but it sounded stylish though vaguely improper. Thick dusk had descended outside, and as the limousine made a sudden turn she was jolted against him; their hands touched. “You shouldn’t smoke, Amory,” she whispered.	she was jolted against him as they turned, and their hands touched.

stirred within Amory.	“I care.” Something stirred within Amory. “Oh, yes, you do!	Amory felt something.

crush on Froggy Parker.	“Oh, yes, you do! You got a crush on Froggy Parker. I guess everybody knows that.”	like Froggy Parker.

silence, while Amory thrilled.	“No, I haven’t,” very slowly. A silence, while Amory thrilled. There was something fascinating about Myra, shut away here cosily from the dim, chill air.	Silence, while Amory felt a rush of excitement.

something fascinating about Myra, shut away here cosily from the dim, chill air.	A silence, while Amory thrilled. There was something fascinating about Myra, shut away here cosily from the dim, chill air. Myra, a little bundle of clothes, with strands of yellow hair curling out from under her skating cap.	Myra was fascinating, tucked away comfortably inside away from the cold, gloomy air.

the dim, chill air	A silence, while Amory thrilled. There was something fascinating about Myra, shut away here cosily from the dim, chill air. Myra, a little bundle of clothes, with strands of yellow hair curling out from under her skating cap.	the cold, dark air

curling out from under her skating cap.	There was something fascinating about Myra, shut away here cosily from the dim, chill air. Myra, a little bundle of clothes, with strands of yellow hair curling out from under her skating cap. “Because I’ve got a crush, too—” He paused, for he heard in the distance the sound of young laughter, and, peering through the frosted glass along the lamp-lit street, he made out the dark outline of the bobbing party.	sticking out from under her skating cap.

young laughter	Myra, a little bundle of clothes, with strands of yellow hair curling out from under her skating cap. “Because I’ve got a crush, too—” He paused, for he heard in the distance the sound of young laughter, and, peering through the frosted glass along the lamp-lit street, he made out the dark outline of the bobbing party. He must act quickly.	young laughter

the frosted glass	Myra, a little bundle of clothes, with strands of yellow hair curling out from under her skating cap. “Because I’ve got a crush, too—” He paused, for he heard in the distance the sound of young laughter, and, peering through the frosted glass along the lamp-lit street, he made out the dark outline of the bobbing party. He must act quickly.	the blurry glass

peering through the frosted glass along the lamp-lit street, he made out the dark outline of the bobbing party.	Myra, a little bundle of clothes, with strands of yellow hair curling out from under her skating cap. “Because I’ve got a crush, too—” He paused, for he heard in the distance the sound of young laughter, and, peering through the frosted glass along the lamp-lit street, he made out the dark outline of the bobbing party. He must act quickly.	looking through the blurry glass along the street lit by lamps, he saw the vague shape of the moving group.

Myra’s hand	He must act quickly. He reached over with a violent, jerky effort, and clutched Myra’s hand—her thumb, to be exact. “Tell him to go to the Minnehaha straight,” he whispered.	Myra's hand

a violent, jerky effort	He must act quickly. He reached over with a violent, jerky effort, and clutched Myra’s hand—her thumb, to be exact. “Tell him to go to the Minnehaha straight,” he whispered.	a sudden, forceful movement

go to the Minnehaha straight,” he whispered.	He reached over with a violent, jerky effort, and clutched Myra’s hand—her thumb, to be exact. “Tell him to go to the Minnehaha straight,” he whispered. “I wanta talk to you—I got to talk to you.”	Go directly to the Minnehaha, he whispered.

vision of her mother, and then—alas for convention—glanced into the eyes beside.	“I wanta talk to you—I got to talk to you.” Myra made out the party ahead, had an instant vision of her mother, and then—alas for convention—glanced into the eyes beside. “Turn down this side street, Richard, and drive straight to the Minnehaha Club!”	She pictured her mother for a moment, and then, ignoring what was proper, looked into Richard's eyes.

the Minnehaha Club	Myra made out the party ahead, had an instant vision of her mother, and then—alas for convention—glanced into the eyes beside. “Turn down this side street, Richard, and drive straight to the Minnehaha Club!” she cried through the speaking tube.	the Minnehaha Club

street, Richard, and drive straight to the Minnehaha Club!”	Myra made out the party ahead, had an instant vision of her mother, and then—alas for convention—glanced into the eyes beside. “Turn down this side street, Richard, and drive straight to the Minnehaha Club!” she cried through the speaking tube.	"Richard, turn onto this side street and drive directly to the Minnehaha Club!"

sigh of relief.	she cried through the speaking tube. Amory sank back against the cushions with a sigh of relief. “I can kiss her,” he thought.	sigh of relief.

half misty	I’ll bet I can!” Overhead the sky was half crystalline, half misty, and the night around was chill and vibrant with rich tension. From the Country Club steps the roads stretched away, dark creases on the white blanket; huge heaps of snow lining the sides like the tracks of giant moles.	part foggy

vibrant with rich tension.	I’ll bet I can!” Overhead the sky was half crystalline, half misty, and the night around was chill and vibrant with rich tension. From the Country Club steps the roads stretched away, dark creases on the white blanket; huge heaps of snow lining the sides like the tracks of giant moles.	full of energy and excitement.

heaps of snow lining the sides like the tracks of giant moles.	Overhead the sky was half crystalline, half misty, and the night around was chill and vibrant with rich tension. From the Country Club steps the roads stretched away, dark creases on the white blanket; huge heaps of snow lining the sides like the tracks of giant moles. They lingered for a moment on the steps, and watched the white holiday moon.	piles of snow along the sides looked like giant mole tracks.

huge heaps	Overhead the sky was half crystalline, half misty, and the night around was chill and vibrant with rich tension. From the Country Club steps the roads stretched away, dark creases on the white blanket; huge heaps of snow lining the sides like the tracks of giant moles. They lingered for a moment on the steps, and watched the white holiday moon.	big piles

dark creases	Overhead the sky was half crystalline, half misty, and the night around was chill and vibrant with rich tension. From the Country Club steps the roads stretched away, dark creases on the white blanket; huge heaps of snow lining the sides like the tracks of giant moles. They lingered for a moment on the steps, and watched the white holiday moon.	dark lines

giant moles	Overhead the sky was half crystalline, half misty, and the night around was chill and vibrant with rich tension. From the Country Club steps the roads stretched away, dark creases on the white blanket; huge heaps of snow lining the sides like the tracks of giant moles. They lingered for a moment on the steps, and watched the white holiday moon.	giant moles

lingered for a moment on the steps, and watched the white holiday moon.	From the Country Club steps the roads stretched away, dark creases on the white blanket; huge heaps of snow lining the sides like the tracks of giant moles. They lingered for a moment on the steps, and watched the white holiday moon. “Pale moons like that one”—Amory made a vague gesture—“make people mystérieuse.	stayed on the steps for a moment, watching the white holiday moon.

moons like that one”—Amory made a vague gesture—“make people mystérieuse.	They lingered for a moment on the steps, and watched the white holiday moon. “Pale moons like that one”—Amory made a vague gesture—“make people mystérieuse. You look like a young witch with her cap off and her hair sorta mussed”—her hands clutched at her hair—“Oh, leave it, it looks good.”	moons like that"—Amory gestured vaguely—"make people mysterious.

look like a young witch with her cap off and her hair sorta mussed”—her hands clutched at her hair—“Oh, leave it, it looks good.”	“Pale moons like that one”—Amory made a vague gesture—“make people mystérieuse. You look like a young witch with her cap off and her hair sorta mussed”—her hands clutched at her hair—“Oh, leave it, it looks good.” They drifted up the stairs and Myra led the way into the little den of his dreams, where a cosy fire was burning before a big sink-down couch.	look like a young witch with your hat off and your hair a little messy"—she grabbed her hair—"Oh, leave it, it looks good."

mussed”—her hands	“Pale moons like that one”—Amory made a vague gesture—“make people mystérieuse. You look like a young witch with her cap off and her hair sorta mussed”—her hands clutched at her hair—“Oh, leave it, it looks good.” They drifted up the stairs and Myra led the way into the little den of his dreams, where a cosy fire was burning before a big sink-down couch.	messed up"—her hands

a cosy fire	You look like a young witch with her cap off and her hair sorta mussed”—her hands clutched at her hair—“Oh, leave it, it looks good.” They drifted up the stairs and Myra led the way into the little den of his dreams, where a cosy fire was burning before a big sink-down couch. A few years later this was to be a great stage for Amory, a cradle for many an emotional crisis.	a warm fire

drifted up the stairs and Myra led the way into the little den of his dreams, where a cosy fire was burning before a big sink-down couch.	You look like a young witch with her cap off and her hair sorta mussed”—her hands clutched at her hair—“Oh, leave it, it looks good.” They drifted up the stairs and Myra led the way into the little den of his dreams, where a cosy fire was burning before a big sink-down couch. A few years later this was to be a great stage for Amory, a cradle for many an emotional crisis.	They went upstairs, Myra leading the way into his dream room, where a warm fire was burning in front of a large, soft couch.

a big sink-down couch	You look like a young witch with her cap off and her hair sorta mussed”—her hands clutched at her hair—“Oh, leave it, it looks good.” They drifted up the stairs and Myra led the way into the little den of his dreams, where a cosy fire was burning before a big sink-down couch. A few years later this was to be a great stage for Amory, a cradle for many an emotional crisis.	a large, comfortable couch

Amory, a cradle for many an emotional crisis.	They drifted up the stairs and Myra led the way into the little den of his dreams, where a cosy fire was burning before a big sink-down couch. A few years later this was to be a great stage for Amory, a cradle for many an emotional crisis. Now they talked for a moment about bobbing parties.	Amory, a place where he would later experience many emotional problems.

an’ pushin	Now they talked for a moment about bobbing parties. “There’s always a bunch of shy fellas,” he commented, “sitting at the tail of the bob, sorta lurkin’ an’ whisperin’ an’ pushin’ each other off. Then there’s always some crazy cross-eyed girl”—he gave a terrifying imitation—“she’s always talkin’ hard, sorta, to the chaperon.”	and pushing

whisperin’ an’ pushin’ each other off.	Now they talked for a moment about bobbing parties. “There’s always a bunch of shy fellas,” he commented, “sitting at the tail of the bob, sorta lurkin’ an’ whisperin’ an’ pushin’ each other off. Then there’s always some crazy cross-eyed girl”—he gave a terrifying imitation—“she’s always talkin’ hard, sorta, to the chaperon.”	whispering and pushing each other.

shy fellas	Now they talked for a moment about bobbing parties. “There’s always a bunch of shy fellas,” he commented, “sitting at the tail of the bob, sorta lurkin’ an’ whisperin’ an’ pushin’ each other off. Then there’s always some crazy cross-eyed girl”—he gave a terrifying imitation—“she’s always talkin’ hard, sorta, to the chaperon.”	shy guys

an’ whisperin	Now they talked for a moment about bobbing parties. “There’s always a bunch of shy fellas,” he commented, “sitting at the tail of the bob, sorta lurkin’ an’ whisperin’ an’ pushin’ each other off. Then there’s always some crazy cross-eyed girl”—he gave a terrifying imitation—“she’s always talkin’ hard, sorta, to the chaperon.”	and whispering

some crazy cross-eyed girl”—he	“There’s always a bunch of shy fellas,” he commented, “sitting at the tail of the bob, sorta lurkin’ an’ whisperin’ an’ pushin’ each other off. Then there’s always some crazy cross-eyed girl”—he gave a terrifying imitation—“she’s always talkin’ hard, sorta, to the chaperon.” “You’re such a funny boy,” puzzled Myra.	some crazy cross-eyed girl" - he

gave a terrifying imitation—“she’s always talkin’ hard, sorta, to the chaperon.”	“There’s always a bunch of shy fellas,” he commented, “sitting at the tail of the bob, sorta lurkin’ an’ whisperin’ an’ pushin’ each other off. Then there’s always some crazy cross-eyed girl”—he gave a terrifying imitation—“she’s always talkin’ hard, sorta, to the chaperon.” “You’re such a funny boy,” puzzled Myra.	did a scary impression—"she's always talking loudly, kind of, to the chaperone."

skiing with Marylyn and I tomorrow?”	“Oh—always talking about crazy things. Why don’t you come skiing with Marylyn and I tomorrow?” “I don’t like girls in the daytime,” he said shortly, and then, thinking this a bit abrupt, he added: “But I like you.”	skiing with Marylyn and me tomorrow?

girls in the daytime,” he said shortly, and then, thinking this a bit abrupt, he added: “But I like you.”	Why don’t you come skiing with Marylyn and I tomorrow?” “I don’t like girls in the daytime,” he said shortly, and then, thinking this a bit abrupt, he added: “But I like you.” He cleared his throat.	I don't like girls during the day," he said quickly, then, realizing that was a little rude, he added, "But I like you."

Myra’s eyes	“I like you first and second and third.” Myra’s eyes became dreamy. What a story this would make to tell Marylyn!	Myra's eyes.

couch with this wonderful-looking boy—the little fire—the sense that they were alone in the great building— Myra capitulated.	What a story this would make to tell Marylyn! Here on the couch with this wonderful-looking boy—the little fire—the sense that they were alone in the great building— Myra capitulated. The atmosphere was too appropriate.	couch with this handsome boy, the cozy fire, and the feeling of being alone in the huge building, Myra gave in.

fallen twenty-five places in one hour.	“I like you the first twenty-five,” she confessed, her voice trembling, “and Froggy Parker twenty-sixth.” Froggy had fallen twenty-five places in one hour. As yet he had not even noticed it.	dropped twenty-five spots in one hour.

Myra’s cheek	As yet he had not even noticed it. But Amory, being on the spot, leaned over quickly and kissed Myra’s cheek. He had never kissed a girl before, and he tasted his lips curiously, as if he had munched some new fruit.	Myra's cheek

leaned over quickly and kissed Myra’s cheek.	As yet he had not even noticed it. But Amory, being on the spot, leaned over quickly and kissed Myra’s cheek. He had never kissed a girl before, and he tasted his lips curiously, as if he had munched some new fruit.	quickly leaned over and kissed Myra's cheek.

tasted his lips curiously, as if he had munched some new fruit.	But Amory, being on the spot, leaned over quickly and kissed Myra’s cheek. He had never kissed a girl before, and he tasted his lips curiously, as if he had munched some new fruit. Then their lips brushed like young wild flowers in the wind.	He tasted his lips, curious, like he'd just eaten some new fruit.

brushed like young wild flowers in the wind.	He had never kissed a girl before, and he tasted his lips curiously, as if he had munched some new fruit. Then their lips brushed like young wild flowers in the wind. “We’re awful,” rejoiced Myra gently.	touched gently like wildflowers in the breeze.

drooped against his shoulder.	“We’re awful,” rejoiced Myra gently. She slipped her hand into his, her head drooped against his shoulder. Sudden revulsion seized Amory, disgust, loathing for the whole incident.	Leaned against his shoulder.

Amory, disgust, loathing for the whole incident.	She slipped her hand into his, her head drooped against his shoulder. Sudden revulsion seized Amory, disgust, loathing for the whole incident. He desired frantically to be away, never to see Myra again, never to kiss anyone; he became conscious of his face and hers, of their clinging hands, and he wanted to creep out of his body and hide somewhere safe out of sight, up in the corner of his mind.	Amory felt disgust and hatred for the whole thing.

Sudden revulsion	She slipped her hand into his, her head drooped against his shoulder. Sudden revulsion seized Amory, disgust, loathing for the whole incident. He desired frantically to be away, never to see Myra again, never to kiss anyone; he became conscious of his face and hers, of their clinging hands, and he wanted to creep out of his body and hide somewhere safe out of sight, up in the corner of his mind.	Sudden disgust.

their clinging hands	Sudden revulsion seized Amory, disgust, loathing for the whole incident. He desired frantically to be away, never to see Myra again, never to kiss anyone; he became conscious of his face and hers, of their clinging hands, and he wanted to creep out of his body and hide somewhere safe out of sight, up in the corner of his mind. “Kiss me again.”	their hands holding tightly

creep out of his body and hide somewhere safe out of sight, up in the corner of his mind.	Sudden revulsion seized Amory, disgust, loathing for the whole incident. He desired frantically to be away, never to see Myra again, never to kiss anyone; he became conscious of his face and hers, of their clinging hands, and he wanted to creep out of his body and hide somewhere safe out of sight, up in the corner of his mind. “Kiss me again.”	leave his body and hide in a safe, unseen place in his thoughts.

pink with bruised vanity, the great bow on the back of her head trembling sympathetically.	he repeated passionately. Myra sprang up, her cheeks pink with bruised vanity, the great bow on the back of her head trembling sympathetically. “I hate you!”	Her cheeks were flushed with hurt pride, and the large bow on her head seemed to quiver along with her emotions.

bruised vanity	he repeated passionately. Myra sprang up, her cheeks pink with bruised vanity, the great bow on the back of her head trembling sympathetically. “I hate you!”	Hurt pride

were a new animal of whose presence on the earth he had not heretofore been aware.	I’ll tell mama, and she won’t let me play with you!” Amory rose and stared at her helplessly, as though she were a new animal of whose presence on the earth he had not heretofore been aware. The door opened suddenly, and Myra’s mother appeared on the threshold, fumbling with her lorgnette.	was a creature he didn't know existed.

Myra’s mother	Amory rose and stared at her helplessly, as though she were a new animal of whose presence on the earth he had not heretofore been aware. The door opened suddenly, and Myra’s mother appeared on the threshold, fumbling with her lorgnette. “Well,” she began, adjusting it benignantly, “the man at the desk told me you two children were up here—How do you do, Amory.”	Myra's mother

fumbling with her lorgnette.	Amory rose and stared at her helplessly, as though she were a new animal of whose presence on the earth he had not heretofore been aware. The door opened suddenly, and Myra’s mother appeared on the threshold, fumbling with her lorgnette. “Well,” she began, adjusting it benignantly, “the man at the desk told me you two children were up here—How do you do, Amory.”	struggling with her opera glasses.

man at the desk told me you two children were up here—How do you do, Amory.”	The door opened suddenly, and Myra’s mother appeared on the threshold, fumbling with her lorgnette. “Well,” she began, adjusting it benignantly, “the man at the desk told me you two children were up here—How do you do, Amory.” Amory watched Myra and waited for the crash—but none came.	the person at the front desk told me you two were up here—Hello, Amory.

Myra’s voice	Amory watched Myra and waited for the crash—but none came. The pout faded, the high pink subsided, and Myra’s voice was placid as a summer lake when she answered her mother. “Oh, we started so late, mama, that I thought we might as well—” He heard from below the shrieks of laughter, and smelled the vapid odor of hot chocolate and teacakes as he silently followed mother and daughter downstairs.	Myra's voice

subsided, and Myra’s voice was placid as a summer lake when she answered her mother.	Amory watched Myra and waited for the crash—but none came. The pout faded, the high pink subsided, and Myra’s voice was placid as a summer lake when she answered her mother. “Oh, we started so late, mama, that I thought we might as well—” He heard from below the shrieks of laughter, and smelled the vapid odor of hot chocolate and teacakes as he silently followed mother and daughter downstairs.	subsided, and Myra's voice was calm like a summer lake when she answered her mother.

the vapid odor	The pout faded, the high pink subsided, and Myra’s voice was placid as a summer lake when she answered her mother. “Oh, we started so late, mama, that I thought we might as well—” He heard from below the shrieks of laughter, and smelled the vapid odor of hot chocolate and teacakes as he silently followed mother and daughter downstairs. The sound of the graphophone mingled with the voices of many girls humming the air, and a faint glow was born and spread over him: “Casey-Jones—mounted to the cab-un Casey-Jones—’th his orders in his hand.	the weak smell

odor of hot chocolate and teacakes as he silently followed mother and daughter downstairs.	The pout faded, the high pink subsided, and Myra’s voice was placid as a summer lake when she answered her mother. “Oh, we started so late, mama, that I thought we might as well—” He heard from below the shrieks of laughter, and smelled the vapid odor of hot chocolate and teacakes as he silently followed mother and daughter downstairs. The sound of the graphophone mingled with the voices of many girls humming the air, and a faint glow was born and spread over him: “Casey-Jones—mounted to the cab-un Casey-Jones—’th his orders in his hand.	smell of hot chocolate and teacakes as he quietly followed mother and daughter downstairs.

mingled with the voices of many girls humming the air, and a faint glow was born and spread over him: “Casey-Jones—mounted to the cab-un Casey-Jones—’th his orders in his hand.	“Oh, we started so late, mama, that I thought we might as well—” He heard from below the shrieks of laughter, and smelled the vapid odor of hot chocolate and teacakes as he silently followed mother and daughter downstairs. The sound of the graphophone mingled with the voices of many girls humming the air, and a faint glow was born and spread over him: “Casey-Jones—mounted to the cab-un Casey-Jones—’th his orders in his hand. Casey-Jones—mounted to the cab-un Took his farewell journey to the promised land.”	blended with the girls' humming, and a warm feeling started to grow inside him: "Casey-Jones—mounted to the cab-un Casey-Jones—'th his orders in his hand.

the cab-un Casey-Jones—’th	“Oh, we started so late, mama, that I thought we might as well—” He heard from below the shrieks of laughter, and smelled the vapid odor of hot chocolate and teacakes as he silently followed mother and daughter downstairs. The sound of the graphophone mingled with the voices of many girls humming the air, and a faint glow was born and spread over him: “Casey-Jones—mounted to the cab-un Casey-Jones—’th his orders in his hand. Casey-Jones—mounted to the cab-un Took his farewell journey to the promised land.”	the cab, Casey Jones, with

a faint glow	“Oh, we started so late, mama, that I thought we might as well—” He heard from below the shrieks of laughter, and smelled the vapid odor of hot chocolate and teacakes as he silently followed mother and daughter downstairs. The sound of the graphophone mingled with the voices of many girls humming the air, and a faint glow was born and spread over him: “Casey-Jones—mounted to the cab-un Casey-Jones—’th his orders in his hand. Casey-Jones—mounted to the cab-un Took his farewell journey to the promised land.”	a slight feeling of happiness

his farewell journey	The sound of the graphophone mingled with the voices of many girls humming the air, and a faint glow was born and spread over him: “Casey-Jones—mounted to the cab-un Casey-Jones—’th his orders in his hand. Casey-Jones—mounted to the cab-un Took his farewell journey to the promised land.”	his last trip

mounted to the cab-un Took his farewell journey to the promised land.”	The sound of the graphophone mingled with the voices of many girls humming the air, and a faint glow was born and spread over him: “Casey-Jones—mounted to the cab-un Casey-Jones—’th his orders in his hand. Casey-Jones—mounted to the cab-un Took his farewell journey to the promised land.”	got into the train cab, taking his last ride to heaven.

spent nearly two years in Minneapolis.	Amory spent nearly two years in Minneapolis. The first winter he wore moccasins that were born yellow, but after many applications of oil and dirt assumed their mature color, a dirty, greenish brown; he wore a gray plaid mackinaw coat, and a red toboggan cap.	lived in Minneapolis for almost two years.

moccasins that were born yellow, but after many applications of oil and dirt assumed their mature color, a dirty, greenish brown; he wore a gray plaid mackinaw coat, and a red toboggan cap.	Amory spent nearly two years in Minneapolis. The first winter he wore moccasins that were born yellow, but after many applications of oil and dirt assumed their mature color, a dirty, greenish brown; he wore a gray plaid mackinaw coat, and a red toboggan cap. His dog, Count Del Monte, ate the red cap, so his uncle gave him a gray one that pulled down over his face.	yellow moccasins that became a dirty, greenish brown after being treated with oil and dirt; he wore a gray plaid coat and a red winter hat.

a gray plaid mackinaw coat	Amory spent nearly two years in Minneapolis. The first winter he wore moccasins that were born yellow, but after many applications of oil and dirt assumed their mature color, a dirty, greenish brown; he wore a gray plaid mackinaw coat, and a red toboggan cap. His dog, Count Del Monte, ate the red cap, so his uncle gave him a gray one that pulled down over his face.	a gray plaid coat

a red toboggan cap	Amory spent nearly two years in Minneapolis. The first winter he wore moccasins that were born yellow, but after many applications of oil and dirt assumed their mature color, a dirty, greenish brown; he wore a gray plaid mackinaw coat, and a red toboggan cap. His dog, Count Del Monte, ate the red cap, so his uncle gave him a gray one that pulled down over his face.	a red knit hat

a dirty, greenish brown	Amory spent nearly two years in Minneapolis. The first winter he wore moccasins that were born yellow, but after many applications of oil and dirt assumed their mature color, a dirty, greenish brown; he wore a gray plaid mackinaw coat, and a red toboggan cap. His dog, Count Del Monte, ate the red cap, so his uncle gave him a gray one that pulled down over his face.	dirty, greenish-brown

pulled down over his face.	The first winter he wore moccasins that were born yellow, but after many applications of oil and dirt assumed their mature color, a dirty, greenish brown; he wore a gray plaid mackinaw coat, and a red toboggan cap. His dog, Count Del Monte, ate the red cap, so his uncle gave him a gray one that pulled down over his face. The trouble with this one was that you breathed into it and your breath froze; one day the darn thing froze his cheek.	covered his face.

the darn thing	His dog, Count Del Monte, ate the red cap, so his uncle gave him a gray one that pulled down over his face. The trouble with this one was that you breathed into it and your breath froze; one day the darn thing froze his cheek. He rubbed snow on his cheek, but it turned bluish-black just the same.	the stupid cap

trouble with this one was that you breathed into it and your breath froze; one day the darn thing froze his cheek.	His dog, Count Del Monte, ate the red cap, so his uncle gave him a gray one that pulled down over his face. The trouble with this one was that you breathed into it and your breath froze; one day the darn thing froze his cheek. He rubbed snow on his cheek, but it turned bluish-black just the same.	The problem with it was your breath would freeze inside; one day it froze his cheek.

rubbed snow on his cheek, but it turned bluish-black just the same.	The trouble with this one was that you breathed into it and your breath froze; one day the darn thing froze his cheek. He rubbed snow on his cheek, but it turned bluish-black just the same. The Count Del Monte ate a box of bluing once, but it didn’t hurt him.	rubbed snow on his cheek, but it still turned bluish-black.

his eccentric course	The Count Del Monte ate a box of bluing once, but it didn’t hurt him. Later, however, he lost his mind and ran madly up the street, bumping into fences, rolling in gutters, and pursuing his eccentric course out of Amory’s life. Amory cried on his bed.	his strange path

Amory’s life	The Count Del Monte ate a box of bluing once, but it didn’t hurt him. Later, however, he lost his mind and ran madly up the street, bumping into fences, rolling in gutters, and pursuing his eccentric course out of Amory’s life. Amory cried on his bed.	Amory's life

bumping into fences, rolling in gutters, and pursuing his eccentric course out of Amory’s life.	The Count Del Monte ate a box of bluing once, but it didn’t hurt him. Later, however, he lost his mind and ran madly up the street, bumping into fences, rolling in gutters, and pursuing his eccentric course out of Amory’s life. Amory cried on his bed.	running into fences, falling in the street, and going crazy, leaving Amory's life.

occurred in Act III of Arsène Lupin.	After several months he suspected Count of a fine piece of emotional acting. Amory and Frog Parker considered that the greatest line in literature occurred in Act III of Arsène Lupin. They sat in the first row at the Wednesday and Saturday matinees.	happened in Act III of Arsène Lupin.

sat in the first row at the Wednesday and Saturday matinees.	Amory and Frog Parker considered that the greatest line in literature occurred in Act III of Arsène Lupin. They sat in the first row at the Wednesday and Saturday matinees. The line was: “If one can’t be a great artist or a great soldier, the next best thing is to be a great criminal.”	sat in the front row at the Wednesday and Saturday afternoon shows.

the Wednesday and Saturday matinees	Amory and Frog Parker considered that the greatest line in literature occurred in Act III of Arsène Lupin. They sat in the first row at the Wednesday and Saturday matinees. The line was: “If one can’t be a great artist or a great soldier, the next best thing is to be a great criminal.”	the Wednesday and Saturday afternoon shows

be a great artist or a great soldier, the next best thing is to be a great criminal.”	They sat in the first row at the Wednesday and Saturday matinees. The line was: “If one can’t be a great artist or a great soldier, the next best thing is to be a great criminal.” Amory fell in love again, and wrote a poem.	If you can't be a brilliant artist or a brave soldier, the next best thing is to be a master criminal.

stands above Sallee in that sweet, deep love.”	This was it: “Marylyn and Sallee, Those are the girls for me. Marylyn stands above Sallee in that sweet, deep love.” He was interested in whether McGovern of Minnesota would make the first or second All-American, how to do the card-pass, how to do the coin-pass, chameleon ties, how babies were born, and whether Three-fingered Brown was really a better pitcher than Christie Mathewson.	Loves Marylyn more than Sallee.

a better pitcher	Marylyn stands above Sallee in that sweet, deep love.” He was interested in whether McGovern of Minnesota would make the first or second All-American, how to do the card-pass, how to do the coin-pass, chameleon ties, how babies were born, and whether Three-fingered Brown was really a better pitcher than Christie Mathewson. Among other things he read: For the Honor of the School, Little Women (twice), The Common Law, Sapho, Dangerous Dan McGrew, The Broad Highway (three times), The Fall of the House of Usher, Three Weeks, Mary Ware, the Little Colonel’s Chum, Gunga Din, The Police Gazette, and Jim-Jam Jems.	a better pitcher

the coin-pass, chameleon ties	Marylyn stands above Sallee in that sweet, deep love.” He was interested in whether McGovern of Minnesota would make the first or second All-American, how to do the card-pass, how to do the coin-pass, chameleon ties, how babies were born, and whether Three-fingered Brown was really a better pitcher than Christie Mathewson. Among other things he read: For the Honor of the School, Little Women (twice), The Common Law, Sapho, Dangerous Dan McGrew, The Broad Highway (three times), The Fall of the House of Usher, Three Weeks, Mary Ware, the Little Colonel’s Chum, Gunga Din, The Police Gazette, and Jim-Jam Jems.	coin tricks, color-changing ties

McGovern of Minnesota would make the first or second All-American, how to do the card-pass, how to do the coin-pass, chameleon ties, how babies were born, and whether Three-fingered Brown was really a better pitcher than Christie Mathewson.	Marylyn stands above Sallee in that sweet, deep love.” He was interested in whether McGovern of Minnesota would make the first or second All-American, how to do the card-pass, how to do the coin-pass, chameleon ties, how babies were born, and whether Three-fingered Brown was really a better pitcher than Christie Mathewson. Among other things he read: For the Honor of the School, Little Women (twice), The Common Law, Sapho, Dangerous Dan McGrew, The Broad Highway (three times), The Fall of the House of Usher, Three Weeks, Mary Ware, the Little Colonel’s Chum, Gunga Din, The Police Gazette, and Jim-Jam Jems.	Whether McGovern from Minnesota would be a top-ranked All-American player, how to do card tricks and coin tricks, color-changing ties, the facts about childbirth, and if Three-fingered Brown was a better baseball pitcher than Christie Mathewson.

Law, Sapho, Dangerous Dan McGrew, The Broad Highway (three times), The Fall of the House of Usher, Three Weeks, Mary Ware, the Little Colonel’s Chum, Gunga Din, The Police Gazette, and Jim-Jam Jems.	He was interested in whether McGovern of Minnesota would make the first or second All-American, how to do the card-pass, how to do the coin-pass, chameleon ties, how babies were born, and whether Three-fingered Brown was really a better pitcher than Christie Mathewson. Among other things he read: For the Honor of the School, Little Women (twice), The Common Law, Sapho, Dangerous Dan McGrew, The Broad Highway (three times), The Fall of the House of Usher, Three Weeks, Mary Ware, the Little Colonel’s Chum, Gunga Din, The Police Gazette, and Jim-Jam Jems. He had all the Henty biases in history, and was particularly fond of the cheerful murder stories of Mary Roberts Rinehart.	Law, Sapho, Dangerous Dan McGrew, The Broad Highway (read three times), The Fall of the House of Usher, Three Weeks, Mary Ware, The Little Colonel's Chum, Gunga Din, The Police Gazette, and Jim-Jam Jems.

Jim-Jam Jems	He was interested in whether McGovern of Minnesota would make the first or second All-American, how to do the card-pass, how to do the coin-pass, chameleon ties, how babies were born, and whether Three-fingered Brown was really a better pitcher than Christie Mathewson. Among other things he read: For the Honor of the School, Little Women (twice), The Common Law, Sapho, Dangerous Dan McGrew, The Broad Highway (three times), The Fall of the House of Usher, Three Weeks, Mary Ware, the Little Colonel’s Chum, Gunga Din, The Police Gazette, and Jim-Jam Jems. He had all the Henty biases in history, and was particularly fond of the cheerful murder stories of Mary Roberts Rinehart.	Jim-Jam Jems

the Little Colonel’s Chum	He was interested in whether McGovern of Minnesota would make the first or second All-American, how to do the card-pass, how to do the coin-pass, chameleon ties, how babies were born, and whether Three-fingered Brown was really a better pitcher than Christie Mathewson. Among other things he read: For the Honor of the School, Little Women (twice), The Common Law, Sapho, Dangerous Dan McGrew, The Broad Highway (three times), The Fall of the House of Usher, Three Weeks, Mary Ware, the Little Colonel’s Chum, Gunga Din, The Police Gazette, and Jim-Jam Jems. He had all the Henty biases in history, and was particularly fond of the cheerful murder stories of Mary Roberts Rinehart.	The Little Colonel's Chum

biases in history, and was particularly fond of the cheerful murder stories of Mary Roberts Rinehart.	Among other things he read: For the Honor of the School, Little Women (twice), The Common Law, Sapho, Dangerous Dan McGrew, The Broad Highway (three times), The Fall of the House of Usher, Three Weeks, Mary Ware, the Little Colonel’s Chum, Gunga Din, The Police Gazette, and Jim-Jam Jems. He had all the Henty biases in history, and was particularly fond of the cheerful murder stories of Mary Roberts Rinehart. School ruined his French and gave him a distaste for standard authors.	He had all the usual historical prejudices and especially liked Mary Roberts Rinehart's lighthearted murder mysteries.

all the Henty biases	Among other things he read: For the Honor of the School, Little Women (twice), The Common Law, Sapho, Dangerous Dan McGrew, The Broad Highway (three times), The Fall of the House of Usher, Three Weeks, Mary Ware, the Little Colonel’s Chum, Gunga Din, The Police Gazette, and Jim-Jam Jems. He had all the Henty biases in history, and was particularly fond of the cheerful murder stories of Mary Roberts Rinehart. School ruined his French and gave him a distaste for standard authors.	All the prejudices found in Henty's books.

the cheerful murder stories	Among other things he read: For the Honor of the School, Little Women (twice), The Common Law, Sapho, Dangerous Dan McGrew, The Broad Highway (three times), The Fall of the House of Usher, Three Weeks, Mary Ware, the Little Colonel’s Chum, Gunga Din, The Police Gazette, and Jim-Jam Jems. He had all the Henty biases in history, and was particularly fond of the cheerful murder stories of Mary Roberts Rinehart. School ruined his French and gave him a distaste for standard authors.	happy murder stories

distaste for standard authors.	He had all the Henty biases in history, and was particularly fond of the cheerful murder stories of Mary Roberts Rinehart. School ruined his French and gave him a distaste for standard authors. His masters considered him idle, unreliable and superficially clever.	He didn't like classic books.

owing to his nervous habit of chewing them out of shape.	He wore the rings of several. Finally he could borrow no more rings, owing to his nervous habit of chewing them out of shape. This, it seemed, usually aroused the jealous suspicions of the next borrower.	because he nervously chewed them out of shape.

his nervous habit	He wore the rings of several. Finally he could borrow no more rings, owing to his nervous habit of chewing them out of shape. This, it seemed, usually aroused the jealous suspicions of the next borrower.	his fidgety habit

suspicions of the next borrower.	Finally he could borrow no more rings, owing to his nervous habit of chewing them out of shape. This, it seemed, usually aroused the jealous suspicions of the next borrower. All through the summer months Amory and Frog Parker went each week to the Stock Company.	The next person who lent him a ring would get suspicious.

the jealous suspicions	Finally he could borrow no more rings, owing to his nervous habit of chewing them out of shape. This, it seemed, usually aroused the jealous suspicions of the next borrower. All through the summer months Amory and Frog Parker went each week to the Stock Company.	suspicious jealousy

the next borrower	Finally he could borrow no more rings, owing to his nervous habit of chewing them out of shape. This, it seemed, usually aroused the jealous suspicions of the next borrower. All through the summer months Amory and Frog Parker went each week to the Stock Company.	the next person he borrowed from

stroll home in the balmy air of August night, dreaming along Hennepin and Nicollet Avenues, through the gay crowd.	All through the summer months Amory and Frog Parker went each week to the Stock Company. Afterward they would stroll home in the balmy air of August night, dreaming along Hennepin and Nicollet Avenues, through the gay crowd. Amory wondered how people could fail to notice that he was a boy marked for glory, and when faces of the throng turned toward him and ambiguous eyes stared into his, he assumed the most romantic of expressions and walked on the air cushions that lie on the asphalts of fourteen.	walk home in the pleasant August night air, daydreaming as they passed through the lively crowd on Hennepin and Nicollet Avenues.

the balmy air	All through the summer months Amory and Frog Parker went each week to the Stock Company. Afterward they would stroll home in the balmy air of August night, dreaming along Hennepin and Nicollet Avenues, through the gay crowd. Amory wondered how people could fail to notice that he was a boy marked for glory, and when faces of the throng turned toward him and ambiguous eyes stared into his, he assumed the most romantic of expressions and walked on the air cushions that lie on the asphalts of fourteen.	the pleasant air

the air cushions	Afterward they would stroll home in the balmy air of August night, dreaming along Hennepin and Nicollet Avenues, through the gay crowd. Amory wondered how people could fail to notice that he was a boy marked for glory, and when faces of the throng turned toward him and ambiguous eyes stared into his, he assumed the most romantic of expressions and walked on the air cushions that lie on the asphalts of fourteen. Always, after he was in bed, there were voices—indefinite, fading, enchanting—just outside his window, and before he fell asleep he would dream one of his favorite waking dreams, the one about becoming a great halfback, or the one about the Japanese invasion, when he was rewarded by being made the youngest general in the world.	the way fourteen-year-olds feel when they walk

ambiguous eyes	Afterward they would stroll home in the balmy air of August night, dreaming along Hennepin and Nicollet Avenues, through the gay crowd. Amory wondered how people could fail to notice that he was a boy marked for glory, and when faces of the throng turned toward him and ambiguous eyes stared into his, he assumed the most romantic of expressions and walked on the air cushions that lie on the asphalts of fourteen. Always, after he was in bed, there were voices—indefinite, fading, enchanting—just outside his window, and before he fell asleep he would dream one of his favorite waking dreams, the one about becoming a great halfback, or the one about the Japanese invasion, when he was rewarded by being made the youngest general in the world.	unclear eyes

asphalts of fourteen.	Afterward they would stroll home in the balmy air of August night, dreaming along Hennepin and Nicollet Avenues, through the gay crowd. Amory wondered how people could fail to notice that he was a boy marked for glory, and when faces of the throng turned toward him and ambiguous eyes stared into his, he assumed the most romantic of expressions and walked on the air cushions that lie on the asphalts of fourteen. Always, after he was in bed, there were voices—indefinite, fading, enchanting—just outside his window, and before he fell asleep he would dream one of his favorite waking dreams, the one about becoming a great halfback, or the one about the Japanese invasion, when he was rewarded by being made the youngest general in the world.	pavements of fourteen.

a great halfback	Amory wondered how people could fail to notice that he was a boy marked for glory, and when faces of the throng turned toward him and ambiguous eyes stared into his, he assumed the most romantic of expressions and walked on the air cushions that lie on the asphalts of fourteen. Always, after he was in bed, there were voices—indefinite, fading, enchanting—just outside his window, and before he fell asleep he would dream one of his favorite waking dreams, the one about becoming a great halfback, or the one about the Japanese invasion, when he was rewarded by being made the youngest general in the world. It was always the becoming he dreamed of, never the being.	a star football player

one about the Japanese invasion, when he was rewarded by being made the youngest general in the world.	Amory wondered how people could fail to notice that he was a boy marked for glory, and when faces of the throng turned toward him and ambiguous eyes stared into his, he assumed the most romantic of expressions and walked on the air cushions that lie on the asphalts of fourteen. Always, after he was in bed, there were voices—indefinite, fading, enchanting—just outside his window, and before he fell asleep he would dream one of his favorite waking dreams, the one about becoming a great halfback, or the one about the Japanese invasion, when he was rewarded by being made the youngest general in the world. It was always the becoming he dreamed of, never the being.	the one where Japan invaded, and he was made the world's youngest general as a reward.

becoming he dreamed of, never the being.	Always, after he was in bed, there were voices—indefinite, fading, enchanting—just outside his window, and before he fell asleep he would dream one of his favorite waking dreams, the one about becoming a great halfback, or the one about the Japanese invasion, when he was rewarded by being made the youngest general in the world. It was always the becoming he dreamed of, never the being. This, too, was quite characteristic of Amory.	He dreamed of what he could become, never of what he already was.

characteristic of Amory.	It was always the becoming he dreamed of, never the being. This, too, was quite characteristic of Amory.	typical of Amory.

his first long trousers	Before he was summoned back to Lake Geneva, he had appeared, shy but inwardly glowing, in his first long trousers, set off by a purple accordion tie and a “Belmont” collar with the edges unassailably meeting, purple socks, and handkerchief with a purple border peeping from his breast pocket. But more than that, he had formulated his first philosophy, a code to live by, which, as near as it can be named, was a sort of aristocratic egotism.	his first pair of pants

collar with the edges unassailably meeting, purple socks, and handkerchief with a purple border peeping from his breast pocket.	Before he was summoned back to Lake Geneva, he had appeared, shy but inwardly glowing, in his first long trousers, set off by a purple accordion tie and a “Belmont” collar with the edges unassailably meeting, purple socks, and handkerchief with a purple border peeping from his breast pocket. But more than that, he had formulated his first philosophy, a code to live by, which, as near as it can be named, was a sort of aristocratic egotism.	a collar whose edges perfectly touched, purple socks, and a handkerchief with a purple border showing from his chest pocket.

purple socks	Before he was summoned back to Lake Geneva, he had appeared, shy but inwardly glowing, in his first long trousers, set off by a purple accordion tie and a “Belmont” collar with the edges unassailably meeting, purple socks, and handkerchief with a purple border peeping from his breast pocket. But more than that, he had formulated his first philosophy, a code to live by, which, as near as it can be named, was a sort of aristocratic egotism.	purple socks

unassailably meeting	Before he was summoned back to Lake Geneva, he had appeared, shy but inwardly glowing, in his first long trousers, set off by a purple accordion tie and a “Belmont” collar with the edges unassailably meeting, purple socks, and handkerchief with a purple border peeping from his breast pocket. But more than that, he had formulated his first philosophy, a code to live by, which, as near as it can be named, was a sort of aristocratic egotism.	meeting perfectly

a purple accordion tie	Before he was summoned back to Lake Geneva, he had appeared, shy but inwardly glowing, in his first long trousers, set off by a purple accordion tie and a “Belmont” collar with the edges unassailably meeting, purple socks, and handkerchief with a purple border peeping from his breast pocket. But more than that, he had formulated his first philosophy, a code to live by, which, as near as it can be named, was a sort of aristocratic egotism.	a purple, pleated tie

a “Belmont” collar	Before he was summoned back to Lake Geneva, he had appeared, shy but inwardly glowing, in his first long trousers, set off by a purple accordion tie and a “Belmont” collar with the edges unassailably meeting, purple socks, and handkerchief with a purple border peeping from his breast pocket. But more than that, he had formulated his first philosophy, a code to live by, which, as near as it can be named, was a sort of aristocratic egotism.	a "Belmont" collar

code to live by, which, as near as it can be named, was a sort of aristocratic egotism.	Before he was summoned back to Lake Geneva, he had appeared, shy but inwardly glowing, in his first long trousers, set off by a purple accordion tie and a “Belmont” collar with the edges unassailably meeting, purple socks, and handkerchief with a purple border peeping from his breast pocket. But more than that, he had formulated his first philosophy, a code to live by, which, as near as it can be named, was a sort of aristocratic egotism. He had realized that his best interests were bound up with those of a certain variant, changing person, whose label, in order that his past might always be identified with him, was Amory Blaine.	a personal code based on a kind of self-centered superiority.

aristocratic egotism	Before he was summoned back to Lake Geneva, he had appeared, shy but inwardly glowing, in his first long trousers, set off by a purple accordion tie and a “Belmont” collar with the edges unassailably meeting, purple socks, and handkerchief with a purple border peeping from his breast pocket. But more than that, he had formulated his first philosophy, a code to live by, which, as near as it can be named, was a sort of aristocratic egotism. He had realized that his best interests were bound up with those of a certain variant, changing person, whose label, in order that his past might always be identified with him, was Amory Blaine.	self-centeredness like a rich person

a certain variant	But more than that, he had formulated his first philosophy, a code to live by, which, as near as it can be named, was a sort of aristocratic egotism. He had realized that his best interests were bound up with those of a certain variant, changing person, whose label, in order that his past might always be identified with him, was Amory Blaine. Amory marked himself a fortunate youth, capable of infinite expansion for good or evil.	a specific, changing person

order that his past might always be identified with him, was Amory Blaine.	But more than that, he had formulated his first philosophy, a code to live by, which, as near as it can be named, was a sort of aristocratic egotism. He had realized that his best interests were bound up with those of a certain variant, changing person, whose label, in order that his past might always be identified with him, was Amory Blaine. Amory marked himself a fortunate youth, capable of infinite expansion for good or evil.	so people would always connect his past actions to him, who was Amory Blaine.

capable of infinite expansion for good or evil.	He had realized that his best interests were bound up with those of a certain variant, changing person, whose label, in order that his past might always be identified with him, was Amory Blaine. Amory marked himself a fortunate youth, capable of infinite expansion for good or evil. He did not consider himself a “strong char’c’ter,” but relied on his facility (learn things sorta quick) and his superior mentality (read a lotta deep books).	able to become infinitely better or worse.

a fortunate youth	He had realized that his best interests were bound up with those of a certain variant, changing person, whose label, in order that his past might always be identified with him, was Amory Blaine. Amory marked himself a fortunate youth, capable of infinite expansion for good or evil. He did not consider himself a “strong char’c’ter,” but relied on his facility (learn things sorta quick) and his superior mentality (read a lotta deep books).	a lucky young man

a lotta deep books	Amory marked himself a fortunate youth, capable of infinite expansion for good or evil. He did not consider himself a “strong char’c’ter,” but relied on his facility (learn things sorta quick) and his superior mentality (read a lotta deep books). He was proud of the fact that he could never become a mechanical or scientific genius.	read a lot of complex books

his superior mentality	Amory marked himself a fortunate youth, capable of infinite expansion for good or evil. He did not consider himself a “strong char’c’ter,” but relied on his facility (learn things sorta quick) and his superior mentality (read a lotta deep books). He was proud of the fact that he could never become a mechanical or scientific genius.	his intelligence

relied on his facility (learn things sorta quick) and his superior mentality (read a lotta deep books).	Amory marked himself a fortunate youth, capable of infinite expansion for good or evil. He did not consider himself a “strong char’c’ter,” but relied on his facility (learn things sorta quick) and his superior mentality (read a lotta deep books). He was proud of the fact that he could never become a mechanical or scientific genius.	depended on his quick learning and his intelligence (from reading many advanced books).

a mechanical or scientific genius	He did not consider himself a “strong char’c’ter,” but relied on his facility (learn things sorta quick) and his superior mentality (read a lotta deep books). He was proud of the fact that he could never become a mechanical or scientific genius. From no other heights was he debarred.	someone incredibly skilled in mechanics or science

fact that he could never become a mechanical or scientific genius.	He did not consider himself a “strong char’c’ter,” but relied on his facility (learn things sorta quick) and his superior mentality (read a lotta deep books). He was proud of the fact that he could never become a mechanical or scientific genius. From no other heights was he debarred.	He was proud he could never be a mechanical or scientific genius.

athlete of possibilities and a supple dancer.	He was. He fancied himself an athlete of possibilities and a supple dancer. Socially.—Here his condition was, perhaps, most dangerous.	He thought he could do anything and adapt to any situation.

a supple dancer	He was. He fancied himself an athlete of possibilities and a supple dancer. Socially.—Here his condition was, perhaps, most dangerous.	a flexible dancer

power of dominating all contemporary males, the gift of fascinating all women.	Socially.—Here his condition was, perhaps, most dangerous. He granted himself personality, charm, magnetism, poise, the power of dominating all contemporary males, the gift of fascinating all women. Mentally.—Complete, unquestioned superiority.	The ability to control all men around him and effortlessly attract any woman.

Mentally.—Complete, unquestioned superiority.	He granted himself personality, charm, magnetism, poise, the power of dominating all contemporary males, the gift of fascinating all women. Mentally.—Complete, unquestioned superiority. Now a confession will have to be made.	Mentally—utter and undeniable dominance.

unquestioned superiority	He granted himself personality, charm, magnetism, poise, the power of dominating all contemporary males, the gift of fascinating all women. Mentally.—Complete, unquestioned superiority. Now a confession will have to be made.	Undeniable superiority.

rather a Puritan conscience	Now a confession will have to be made. Amory had rather a Puritan conscience. Not that he yielded to it—later in life he almost completely slew it—but at fifteen it made him consider himself a great deal worse than other boys.	a somewhat strict conscience

made him consider himself a great deal worse than other boys.	Amory had rather a Puritan conscience. Not that he yielded to it—later in life he almost completely slew it—but at fifteen it made him consider himself a great deal worse than other boys. unscrupulousness.	made him think he was much worse than other boys.

desire to influence people in almost every way, even for evil.	unscrupulousness. the desire to influence people in almost every way, even for evil. a certain coldness and lack of affection, amounting sometimes to cruelty.	wanting to control people completely, even to do bad things.

coldness and lack of affection, amounting sometimes to cruelty.	the desire to influence people in almost every way, even for evil. a certain coldness and lack of affection, amounting sometimes to cruelty. a shifting sense of honor.	Being cold and uncaring, sometimes even cruel.

a certain coldness	the desire to influence people in almost every way, even for evil. a certain coldness and lack of affection, amounting sometimes to cruelty. a shifting sense of honor.	a kind of coldness

an unholy selfishness	a shifting sense of honor. an unholy selfishness. a puzzled, furtive interest in everything concerning sex.	extreme selfishness

a puzzled, furtive interest	an unholy selfishness. a puzzled, furtive interest in everything concerning sex. There was, also, a curious strain of weakness running crosswise through his makeup.	a confused, secretive interest

interest in everything concerning sex.	an unholy selfishness. a puzzled, furtive interest in everything concerning sex. There was, also, a curious strain of weakness running crosswise through his makeup.	interest in sex.

strain of weakness running crosswise through his makeup.	a puzzled, furtive interest in everything concerning sex. There was, also, a curious strain of weakness running crosswise through his makeup. a harsh phrase from the lips of an older boy (older boys usually detested him) was liable to sweep him off his poise into surly sensitiveness, or timid stupidity.	a streak of vulnerability in his personality.

surly sensitiveness	There was, also, a curious strain of weakness running crosswise through his makeup. a harsh phrase from the lips of an older boy (older boys usually detested him) was liable to sweep him off his poise into surly sensitiveness, or timid stupidity. he was a slave to his own moods and he felt that though he was capable of recklessness and audacity, he possessed neither courage, perseverance, nor self-respect.	grumpy and easily offended

a harsh phrase	There was, also, a curious strain of weakness running crosswise through his makeup. a harsh phrase from the lips of an older boy (older boys usually detested him) was liable to sweep him off his poise into surly sensitiveness, or timid stupidity. he was a slave to his own moods and he felt that though he was capable of recklessness and audacity, he possessed neither courage, perseverance, nor self-respect.	Mean words

timid stupidity	There was, also, a curious strain of weakness running crosswise through his makeup. a harsh phrase from the lips of an older boy (older boys usually detested him) was liable to sweep him off his poise into surly sensitiveness, or timid stupidity. he was a slave to his own moods and he felt that though he was capable of recklessness and audacity, he possessed neither courage, perseverance, nor self-respect.	Shyness and foolishness.

lips of an older boy (older boys usually detested him) was liable to sweep him off his poise into surly sensitiveness, or timid stupidity.	There was, also, a curious strain of weakness running crosswise through his makeup. a harsh phrase from the lips of an older boy (older boys usually detested him) was liable to sweep him off his poise into surly sensitiveness, or timid stupidity. he was a slave to his own moods and he felt that though he was capable of recklessness and audacity, he possessed neither courage, perseverance, nor self-respect.	Older boys, who usually disliked him, could easily upset him with a mean comment, making him either sulky and defensive or shy and foolish.

capable of recklessness and audacity, he possessed neither courage, perseverance, nor self-respect.	a harsh phrase from the lips of an older boy (older boys usually detested him) was liable to sweep him off his poise into surly sensitiveness, or timid stupidity. he was a slave to his own moods and he felt that though he was capable of recklessness and audacity, he possessed neither courage, perseverance, nor self-respect. Vanity, tempered with self-suspicion if not self-knowledge, a sense of people as automatons to his will, a desire to “pass” as many boys as possible and get to a vague top of the world.	He could be reckless and bold, but he lacked courage, persistence, and self-respect.

a vague top	he was a slave to his own moods and he felt that though he was capable of recklessness and audacity, he possessed neither courage, perseverance, nor self-respect. Vanity, tempered with self-suspicion if not self-knowledge, a sense of people as automatons to his will, a desire to “pass” as many boys as possible and get to a vague top of the world. with this background did Amory drift into adolescence.	an undefined success

tempered with self-suspicion if not self-knowledge, a sense of people as automatons to his will, a desire to “pass” as many boys as possible and get to a vague top of the world.	he was a slave to his own moods and he felt that though he was capable of recklessness and audacity, he possessed neither courage, perseverance, nor self-respect. Vanity, tempered with self-suspicion if not self-knowledge, a sense of people as automatons to his will, a desire to “pass” as many boys as possible and get to a vague top of the world. with this background did Amory drift into adolescence.	mixed with self-doubt and a lack of real understanding, he saw people as puppets he could control, wanting to seduce many boys and reach some undefined position of power.

drift into adolescence.	Vanity, tempered with self-suspicion if not self-knowledge, a sense of people as automatons to his will, a desire to “pass” as many boys as possible and get to a vague top of the world. with this background did Amory drift into adolescence.	enter his teens.

midsummer languor	The train slowed up with midsummer languor at Lake Geneva, and Amory caught sight of his mother waiting in her electric on the gravelled station drive. It was an ancient electric, one of the early types, and painted gray.	the laziness of midsummer

mother waiting in her electric on the gravelled station drive.	The train slowed up with midsummer languor at Lake Geneva, and Amory caught sight of his mother waiting in her electric on the gravelled station drive. It was an ancient electric, one of the early types, and painted gray.	mother waiting in her electric car on the gravel driveway.

the gravelled station drive	The train slowed up with midsummer languor at Lake Geneva, and Amory caught sight of his mother waiting in her electric on the gravelled station drive. It was an ancient electric, one of the early types, and painted gray.	the station's gravel driveway

electric, one of the early types, and painted gray.	The train slowed up with midsummer languor at Lake Geneva, and Amory caught sight of his mother waiting in her electric on the gravelled station drive. It was an ancient electric, one of the early types, and painted gray. The sight of her sitting there, slenderly erect, and of her face, where beauty and dignity combined, melting to a dreamy recollected smile, filled him with a sudden great pride of her.	electric car, an old model, and painted gray.

a dreamy recollected smile	It was an ancient electric, one of the early types, and painted gray. The sight of her sitting there, slenderly erect, and of her face, where beauty and dignity combined, melting to a dreamy recollected smile, filled him with a sudden great pride of her. As they kissed coolly and he stepped into the electric, he felt a quick fear lest he had lost the requisite charm to measure up to her.	a smile that recalled a pleasant dream

the requisite charm	The sight of her sitting there, slenderly erect, and of her face, where beauty and dignity combined, melting to a dreamy recollected smile, filled him with a sudden great pride of her. As they kissed coolly and he stepped into the electric, he felt a quick fear lest he had lost the requisite charm to measure up to her. “Dear boy—you’re so tall.	The charm needed

boy—you’re so tall.	As they kissed coolly and he stepped into the electric, he felt a quick fear lest he had lost the requisite charm to measure up to her. “Dear boy—you’re so tall. look behind and see if there’s anything coming.”	Boy, you're so tall.

a traffic policeman	look behind and see if there’s anything coming.” She looked left and right, she slipped cautiously into a speed of two miles an hour, beseeching Amory to act as sentinel; and at one busy crossing she made him get out and run ahead to signal her forward like a traffic policeman. Beatrice was what might be termed a careful driver.	a traffic policeman

slipped cautiously into a speed of two miles an hour, beseeching Amory to act as sentinel; and at one busy crossing she made him get out and run ahead to signal her forward like a traffic policeman.	look behind and see if there’s anything coming.” She looked left and right, she slipped cautiously into a speed of two miles an hour, beseeching Amory to act as sentinel; and at one busy crossing she made him get out and run ahead to signal her forward like a traffic policeman. Beatrice was what might be termed a careful driver.	slowly accelerated to two miles an hour, asking Amory to watch for her; and at a busy intersection, she made him get out and direct her across like a traffic cop.

the awkward age	Beatrice was what might be termed a careful driver. “You are tall—but you’re still very handsome—you’ve skipped the awkward age, or is that sixteen; perhaps it’s fourteen or fifteen; I can never remember; but you’ve skipped it.” “Don’t embarrass me,” murmured Amory.	the awkward age

boy, what odd clothes!	“Don’t embarrass me,” murmured Amory. “But, my dear boy, what odd clothes! They look as if they were a set—don’t they?	Boy, those are strange clothes!

what odd clothes	“Don’t embarrass me,” murmured Amory. “But, my dear boy, what odd clothes! They look as if they were a set—don’t they?	such strange clothes

look as if they were a set—don’t they?	“But, my dear boy, what odd clothes! They look as if they were a set—don’t they? Is your underwear purple, too?”	They look like they all belong together, right?

tell you about your heart—you’ve probably been neglecting your heart—and you don’t know.”	Oh, we’ll have a talk tonight or perhaps tomorrow night. I want to tell you about your heart—you’ve probably been neglecting your heart—and you don’t know.” Amory thought how superficial was the recent overlay of his own generation.	I want to talk to you about your feelings—you're probably ignoring them—and you don't even realize it.

overlay of his own generation.	I want to tell you about your heart—you’ve probably been neglecting your heart—and you don’t know.” Amory thought how superficial was the recent overlay of his own generation. Aside from a minute shyness, he felt that the old cynical kinship with his mother had not been one bit broken.	the way his generation acted.

the recent overlay	I want to tell you about your heart—you’ve probably been neglecting your heart—and you don’t know.” Amory thought how superficial was the recent overlay of his own generation. Aside from a minute shyness, he felt that the old cynical kinship with his mother had not been one bit broken.	the new attitude

a minute shyness	Amory thought how superficial was the recent overlay of his own generation. Aside from a minute shyness, he felt that the old cynical kinship with his mother had not been one bit broken. Yet for the first few days he wandered about the gardens and along the shore in a state of superloneliness, finding a lethargic content in smoking “Bull” at the garage with one of the chauffeurs.	a slight shyness

the old cynical kinship	Amory thought how superficial was the recent overlay of his own generation. Aside from a minute shyness, he felt that the old cynical kinship with his mother had not been one bit broken. Yet for the first few days he wandered about the gardens and along the shore in a state of superloneliness, finding a lethargic content in smoking “Bull” at the garage with one of the chauffeurs.	their old, cynical connection

Aside from a minute shyness, he felt that the old cynical kinship with his mother had not been one bit broken.	Amory thought how superficial was the recent overlay of his own generation. Aside from a minute shyness, he felt that the old cynical kinship with his mother had not been one bit broken. Yet for the first few days he wandered about the gardens and along the shore in a state of superloneliness, finding a lethargic content in smoking “Bull” at the garage with one of the chauffeurs.	Despite a tiny bit of awkwardness, he felt his old cynical connection with his mother was still completely intact.

state of superloneliness, finding a lethargic content in smoking “Bull” at the garage with one of the chauffeurs.	Aside from a minute shyness, he felt that the old cynical kinship with his mother had not been one bit broken. Yet for the first few days he wandered about the gardens and along the shore in a state of superloneliness, finding a lethargic content in smoking “Bull” at the garage with one of the chauffeurs. The sixty acres of the estate were dotted with old and new summer houses and many fountains and white benches that came suddenly into sight from foliage-hung hiding-places; there was a great and constantly increasing family of white cats that prowled the many flowerbeds and were silhouetted suddenly at night against the darkening trees.	extreme loneliness, finding a lazy satisfaction in smoking tobacco at the garage with one of the drivers.

a lethargic content	Aside from a minute shyness, he felt that the old cynical kinship with his mother had not been one bit broken. Yet for the first few days he wandered about the gardens and along the shore in a state of superloneliness, finding a lethargic content in smoking “Bull” at the garage with one of the chauffeurs. The sixty acres of the estate were dotted with old and new summer houses and many fountains and white benches that came suddenly into sight from foliage-hung hiding-places; there was a great and constantly increasing family of white cats that prowled the many flowerbeds and were silhouetted suddenly at night against the darkening trees.	a lazy satisfaction

foliage-hung hiding-places	Yet for the first few days he wandered about the gardens and along the shore in a state of superloneliness, finding a lethargic content in smoking “Bull” at the garage with one of the chauffeurs. The sixty acres of the estate were dotted with old and new summer houses and many fountains and white benches that came suddenly into sight from foliage-hung hiding-places; there was a great and constantly increasing family of white cats that prowled the many flowerbeds and were silhouetted suddenly at night against the darkening trees. It was on one of the shadowy paths that Beatrice at last captured Amory, after Mr. Blaine had, as usual, retired for the evening to his private library.	hidden spots covered in leaves

a great and constantly increasing family	Yet for the first few days he wandered about the gardens and along the shore in a state of superloneliness, finding a lethargic content in smoking “Bull” at the garage with one of the chauffeurs. The sixty acres of the estate were dotted with old and new summer houses and many fountains and white benches that came suddenly into sight from foliage-hung hiding-places; there was a great and constantly increasing family of white cats that prowled the many flowerbeds and were silhouetted suddenly at night against the darkening trees. It was on one of the shadowy paths that Beatrice at last captured Amory, after Mr. Blaine had, as usual, retired for the evening to his private library.	many cats that kept having more kittens

the many flowerbeds	Yet for the first few days he wandered about the gardens and along the shore in a state of superloneliness, finding a lethargic content in smoking “Bull” at the garage with one of the chauffeurs. The sixty acres of the estate were dotted with old and new summer houses and many fountains and white benches that came suddenly into sight from foliage-hung hiding-places; there was a great and constantly increasing family of white cats that prowled the many flowerbeds and were silhouetted suddenly at night against the darkening trees. It was on one of the shadowy paths that Beatrice at last captured Amory, after Mr. Blaine had, as usual, retired for the evening to his private library.	the numerous flower gardens

the darkening trees	Yet for the first few days he wandered about the gardens and along the shore in a state of superloneliness, finding a lethargic content in smoking “Bull” at the garage with one of the chauffeurs. The sixty acres of the estate were dotted with old and new summer houses and many fountains and white benches that came suddenly into sight from foliage-hung hiding-places; there was a great and constantly increasing family of white cats that prowled the many flowerbeds and were silhouetted suddenly at night against the darkening trees. It was on one of the shadowy paths that Beatrice at last captured Amory, after Mr. Blaine had, as usual, retired for the evening to his private library.	trees becoming dark

cats that prowled the many flowerbeds and were silhouetted suddenly at night against the darkening trees.	Yet for the first few days he wandered about the gardens and along the shore in a state of superloneliness, finding a lethargic content in smoking “Bull” at the garage with one of the chauffeurs. The sixty acres of the estate were dotted with old and new summer houses and many fountains and white benches that came suddenly into sight from foliage-hung hiding-places; there was a great and constantly increasing family of white cats that prowled the many flowerbeds and were silhouetted suddenly at night against the darkening trees. It was on one of the shadowy paths that Beatrice at last captured Amory, after Mr. Blaine had, as usual, retired for the evening to his private library.	cats that hunted through the flowerbeds and appeared as dark shapes at night against the trees.

old and new summer houses	Yet for the first few days he wandered about the gardens and along the shore in a state of superloneliness, finding a lethargic content in smoking “Bull” at the garage with one of the chauffeurs. The sixty acres of the estate were dotted with old and new summer houses and many fountains and white benches that came suddenly into sight from foliage-hung hiding-places; there was a great and constantly increasing family of white cats that prowled the many flowerbeds and were silhouetted suddenly at night against the darkening trees. It was on one of the shadowy paths that Beatrice at last captured Amory, after Mr. Blaine had, as usual, retired for the evening to his private library.	summer houses, some old and some new

The sixty acres	Yet for the first few days he wandered about the gardens and along the shore in a state of superloneliness, finding a lethargic content in smoking “Bull” at the garage with one of the chauffeurs. The sixty acres of the estate were dotted with old and new summer houses and many fountains and white benches that came suddenly into sight from foliage-hung hiding-places; there was a great and constantly increasing family of white cats that prowled the many flowerbeds and were silhouetted suddenly at night against the darkening trees. It was on one of the shadowy paths that Beatrice at last captured Amory, after Mr. Blaine had, as usual, retired for the evening to his private library.	The sixty acres

the shadowy paths	The sixty acres of the estate were dotted with old and new summer houses and many fountains and white benches that came suddenly into sight from foliage-hung hiding-places; there was a great and constantly increasing family of white cats that prowled the many flowerbeds and were silhouetted suddenly at night against the darkening trees. It was on one of the shadowy paths that Beatrice at last captured Amory, after Mr. Blaine had, as usual, retired for the evening to his private library. After reproving him for avoiding her, she took him for a long tête-à-tête in the moonlight.	the dimly lit paths

paths that Beatrice at last captured Amory, after Mr. Blaine had, as usual, retired for the evening to his private library.	The sixty acres of the estate were dotted with old and new summer houses and many fountains and white benches that came suddenly into sight from foliage-hung hiding-places; there was a great and constantly increasing family of white cats that prowled the many flowerbeds and were silhouetted suddenly at night against the darkening trees. It was on one of the shadowy paths that Beatrice at last captured Amory, after Mr. Blaine had, as usual, retired for the evening to his private library. After reproving him for avoiding her, she took him for a long tête-à-tête in the moonlight.	Beatrice finally caught up with Amory on the paths after Mr. Blaine had, as he always did, gone to his private library for the night.

a long tête-à-tête	It was on one of the shadowy paths that Beatrice at last captured Amory, after Mr. Blaine had, as usual, retired for the evening to his private library. After reproving him for avoiding her, she took him for a long tête-à-tête in the moonlight. He could not reconcile himself to her beauty, that was mother to his own, the exquisite neck and shoulders, the grace of a fortunate woman of thirty.	a long, private conversation

reproving him for avoiding her, she took him for a long tête-à-tête in the moonlight.	It was on one of the shadowy paths that Beatrice at last captured Amory, after Mr. Blaine had, as usual, retired for the evening to his private library. After reproving him for avoiding her, she took him for a long tête-à-tête in the moonlight. He could not reconcile himself to her beauty, that was mother to his own, the exquisite neck and shoulders, the grace of a fortunate woman of thirty.	She scolded him for avoiding her, then took him for a long, private talk in the moonlight.

a fortunate woman	After reproving him for avoiding her, she took him for a long tête-à-tête in the moonlight. He could not reconcile himself to her beauty, that was mother to his own, the exquisite neck and shoulders, the grace of a fortunate woman of thirty. “Amory, dear,” she crooned softly, “I had such a strange, weird time after I left you.”	a lucky woman

grace of a fortunate woman of thirty.	After reproving him for avoiding her, she took him for a long tête-à-tête in the moonlight. He could not reconcile himself to her beauty, that was mother to his own, the exquisite neck and shoulders, the grace of a fortunate woman of thirty. “Amory, dear,” she crooned softly, “I had such a strange, weird time after I left you.”	the elegance of a lucky thirty-year-old woman.

the exquisite neck	After reproving him for avoiding her, she took him for a long tête-à-tête in the moonlight. He could not reconcile himself to her beauty, that was mother to his own, the exquisite neck and shoulders, the grace of a fortunate woman of thirty. “Amory, dear,” she crooned softly, “I had such a strange, weird time after I left you.”	the beautiful neck

spoke of it as a sturdy, gallant feat.	“Did you, Beatrice?” “When I had my last breakdown”—she spoke of it as a sturdy, gallant feat. “The doctors told me”—her voice sang on a confidential note—“that if any man alive had done the consistent drinking that I have, he would have been physically shattered, my dear, and in his grave—long in his grave.”	talked about it like it was a brave and impressive achievement.

a sturdy, gallant feat	“Did you, Beatrice?” “When I had my last breakdown”—she spoke of it as a sturdy, gallant feat. “The doctors told me”—her voice sang on a confidential note—“that if any man alive had done the consistent drinking that I have, he would have been physically shattered, my dear, and in his grave—long in his grave.”	a strong, impressive accomplishment

me”—her voice	“When I had my last breakdown”—she spoke of it as a sturdy, gallant feat. “The doctors told me”—her voice sang on a confidential note—“that if any man alive had done the consistent drinking that I have, he would have been physically shattered, my dear, and in his grave—long in his grave.” Amory winced, and wondered how this would have sounded to Froggy Parker.	her voice

done the consistent drinking that I have, he would have been physically shattered, my dear, and in his grave—long in his grave.”	“When I had my last breakdown”—she spoke of it as a sturdy, gallant feat. “The doctors told me”—her voice sang on a confidential note—“that if any man alive had done the consistent drinking that I have, he would have been physically shattered, my dear, and in his grave—long in his grave.” Amory winced, and wondered how this would have sounded to Froggy Parker.	drunk as much as I have, he'd be wrecked and dead by now, darling, long gone."

sounded to Froggy Parker.	“The doctors told me”—her voice sang on a confidential note—“that if any man alive had done the consistent drinking that I have, he would have been physically shattered, my dear, and in his grave—long in his grave.” Amory winced, and wondered how this would have sounded to Froggy Parker. “Yes,” continued Beatrice tragically, “I had dreams—wonderful visions.”	how Froggy Parker would have reacted.

soared through the air, parti-colored birds with iridescent plumage.	She pressed the palms of her hands into her eyes. “I saw bronze rivers lapping marble shores, and great birds that soared through the air, parti-colored birds with iridescent plumage. I heard strange music and the flare of barbaric trumpets—what?”	flew through the air, brightly colored birds with shimmering feathers.

iridescent plumage	She pressed the palms of her hands into her eyes. “I saw bronze rivers lapping marble shores, and great birds that soared through the air, parti-colored birds with iridescent plumage. I heard strange music and the flare of barbaric trumpets—what?”	Shimmering feathers

, parti-colored birds	She pressed the palms of her hands into her eyes. “I saw bronze rivers lapping marble shores, and great birds that soared through the air, parti-colored birds with iridescent plumage. I heard strange music and the flare of barbaric trumpets—what?”	, multicolored birds

barbaric trumpets	“I saw bronze rivers lapping marble shores, and great birds that soared through the air, parti-colored birds with iridescent plumage. I heard strange music and the flare of barbaric trumpets—what?” Amory had snickered.	wild or primitive trumpets

flare of barbaric trumpets—what?”	“I saw bronze rivers lapping marble shores, and great birds that soared through the air, parti-colored birds with iridescent plumage. I heard strange music and the flare of barbaric trumpets—what?” Amory had snickered.	a blast from wild trumpets—what?”

paler than winter moons, more golden than harvest moons—” “Are you quite well now, Beatrice?”	“What, Amory?” “I said go on, Beatrice.” “That was all—it merely recurred and recurred—gardens that flaunted coloring against which this would be quite dull, moons that whirled and swayed, paler than winter moons, more golden than harvest moons—” “Are you quite well now, Beatrice?” “Quite well—as well as I will ever be.	paler than winter moons, more golden than harvest moons.” “Are you okay, Beatrice?”

quite dull, moons	“What, Amory?” “I said go on, Beatrice.” “That was all—it merely recurred and recurred—gardens that flaunted coloring against which this would be quite dull, moons that whirled and swayed, paler than winter moons, more golden than harvest moons—” “Are you quite well now, Beatrice?” “Quite well—as well as I will ever be.	very boring, moons

express it to you, Amory, but—I am not understood.”	I am not understood, Amory. I know that can’t express it to you, Amory, but—I am not understood.” Amory was quite moved.	explain it to you, Amory, but—no one understands me.

put his arm around his mother, rubbing his head gently against her shoulder.	Amory was quite moved. He put his arm around his mother, rubbing his head gently against her shoulder. “Poor Beatrice—poor Beatrice.”	hugged his mother, gently rubbing his head against her.

poor Beatrice	He put his arm around his mother, rubbing his head gently against her shoulder. “Poor Beatrice—poor Beatrice.” “Tell me about you, Amory.	Poor Beatrice

Beatrice—poor Beatrice.”	He put his arm around his mother, rubbing his head gently against her shoulder. “Poor Beatrice—poor Beatrice.” “Tell me about you, Amory.	Poor Beatrice, poor Beatrice.

“Poor Beatrice	He put his arm around his mother, rubbing his head gently against her shoulder. “Poor Beatrice—poor Beatrice.” “Tell me about you, Amory.	Poor Beatrice

Tell me about you, Amory.	“Poor Beatrice—poor Beatrice.” “Tell me about you, Amory. Did you have two horrible years?”	Tell me about you, Amory.

“No, Beatrice	Amory considered lying, and then decided against it. “No, Beatrice. I enjoyed them.	No, Beatrice.

adapted myself to the bourgeoisie.	I enjoyed them. I adapted myself to the bourgeoisie. I became conventional.”	I fit in with the middle class.

surprised himself by saying that, and he pictured how Froggy would have gaped.	I became conventional.” He surprised himself by saying that, and he pictured how Froggy would have gaped. “Beatrice,” he said suddenly, “I want to go away to school.	He couldn't believe he said that, and he imagined how shocked Froggy would be.

Everybody in Minneapolis is going to go away to school.”	“Beatrice,” he said suddenly, “I want to go away to school. Everybody in Minneapolis is going to go away to school.” Beatrice showed some alarm.	Everyone in Minneapolis is planning to go away to school.

away to school at fifteen, and I want to, Beatrice.”	“But you’re only fifteen.” “Yes, but everybody goes away to school at fifteen, and I want to, Beatrice.” On Beatrice’s suggestion the subject was dropped for the rest of the walk, but a week later she delighted him by saying: “Amory, I have decided to let you have your way.	go away to school at fifteen, and I want to, Beatrice.

delighted him by saying: “Amory, I have decided to let you have your way.	“Yes, but everybody goes away to school at fifteen, and I want to, Beatrice.” On Beatrice’s suggestion the subject was dropped for the rest of the walk, but a week later she delighted him by saying: “Amory, I have decided to let you have your way. If you still want to, you can go to school.”	made him happy by saying, "Amory, I've decided to let you do what you want."

Beatrice’s suggestion	“Yes, but everybody goes away to school at fifteen, and I want to, Beatrice.” On Beatrice’s suggestion the subject was dropped for the rest of the walk, but a week later she delighted him by saying: “Amory, I have decided to let you have your way. If you still want to, you can go to school.”	Beatrice's idea

To St. Regis’s in Connecticut.”	“Yes?” “To St. Regis’s in Connecticut.” Amory felt a quick excitement.	To St. Regis's in Connecticut.

fret away my years in this country.	“Heaven knows. It seems my fate to fret away my years in this country. Not for a second do I regret being American—indeed, I think that a regret typical of very vulgar people, and I feel sure we are the great coming nation—yet”—and she sighed—“I feel my life should have drowsed away close to an older, mellower civilization, a land of greens and autumnal browns—” Amory did not answer, so his mother continued: “My regret is that you haven’t been abroad, but still, as you are a man, it’s better that you should grow up here under the snarling eagle—is that the right term?”	waste my life worrying in this country.

typical of very vulgar people, and I feel sure we are the great coming nation—yet”—and she sighed—“I feel my life should have drowsed away close to an older, mellower civilization, a land of greens and autumnal browns—” Amory did not answer, so his mother continued: “My regret is that you haven’t been abroad, but still, as you are a man, it’s better that you should grow up here under the snarling eagle—is that the right term?”	It seems my fate to fret away my years in this country. Not for a second do I regret being American—indeed, I think that a regret typical of very vulgar people, and I feel sure we are the great coming nation—yet”—and she sighed—“I feel my life should have drowsed away close to an older, mellower civilization, a land of greens and autumnal browns—” Amory did not answer, so his mother continued: “My regret is that you haven’t been abroad, but still, as you are a man, it’s better that you should grow up here under the snarling eagle—is that the right term?” Amory agreed that it was.	common among unrefined people, and I believe we're going to be a powerful nation—but I wish I had lived in an older, more cultured place, with green landscapes and autumn colors. I regret you haven't traveled abroad, but it's probably better for a man to grow up here in America."

the snarling eagle	It seems my fate to fret away my years in this country. Not for a second do I regret being American—indeed, I think that a regret typical of very vulgar people, and I feel sure we are the great coming nation—yet”—and she sighed—“I feel my life should have drowsed away close to an older, mellower civilization, a land of greens and autumnal browns—” Amory did not answer, so his mother continued: “My regret is that you haven’t been abroad, but still, as you are a man, it’s better that you should grow up here under the snarling eagle—is that the right term?” Amory agreed that it was.	a fitting symbol for America

an older, mellower civilization	It seems my fate to fret away my years in this country. Not for a second do I regret being American—indeed, I think that a regret typical of very vulgar people, and I feel sure we are the great coming nation—yet”—and she sighed—“I feel my life should have drowsed away close to an older, mellower civilization, a land of greens and autumnal browns—” Amory did not answer, so his mother continued: “My regret is that you haven’t been abroad, but still, as you are a man, it’s better that you should grow up here under the snarling eagle—is that the right term?” Amory agreed that it was.	a more mature and refined culture

autumnal browns	It seems my fate to fret away my years in this country. Not for a second do I regret being American—indeed, I think that a regret typical of very vulgar people, and I feel sure we are the great coming nation—yet”—and she sighed—“I feel my life should have drowsed away close to an older, mellower civilization, a land of greens and autumnal browns—” Amory did not answer, so his mother continued: “My regret is that you haven’t been abroad, but still, as you are a man, it’s better that you should grow up here under the snarling eagle—is that the right term?” Amory agreed that it was.	browns like those found in autumn

very vulgar people	It seems my fate to fret away my years in this country. Not for a second do I regret being American—indeed, I think that a regret typical of very vulgar people, and I feel sure we are the great coming nation—yet”—and she sighed—“I feel my life should have drowsed away close to an older, mellower civilization, a land of greens and autumnal browns—” Amory did not answer, so his mother continued: “My regret is that you haven’t been abroad, but still, as you are a man, it’s better that you should grow up here under the snarling eagle—is that the right term?” Amory agreed that it was.	tacky people

have a free week, so I want you to go up the Hudson and pay a visit.”	You’ll have to start East a little early to take your examinations. After that you’ll have a free week, so I want you to go up the Hudson and pay a visit.” “To who?” “To Monsignor Darcy, Amory.	You'll have a free week, so I want you to go up the Hudson and visit someone.

To who?” “To Monsignor Darcy, Amory.	After that you’ll have a free week, so I want you to go up the Hudson and pay a visit.” “To who?” “To Monsignor Darcy, Amory. He wants to see you.	To whom?" "To Monsignor Darcy, Amory.

went to Harrow and then to Yale—became a Catholic.	He wants to see you. He went to Harrow and then to Yale—became a Catholic. I want him to talk to you—I feel he can be such a help—” She stroked his auburn hair gently.	He studied at Harrow, then Yale, and converted to Catholicism.

talk to you—I feel he can be such a help—” She stroked his auburn hair gently.	He went to Harrow and then to Yale—became a Catholic. I want him to talk to you—I feel he can be such a help—” She stroked his auburn hair gently. “Dear Amory, dear Amory—” “Dear Beatrice—” So early in September Amory, provided with “six suits summer underwear, six suits winter underwear, one sweater or T shirt, one jersey, one overcoat, winter, etc.,” set out for New England, the land of schools.	talk to you—I think he could really help you.” She stroked his auburn hair gently.

one overcoat	I want him to talk to you—I feel he can be such a help—” She stroked his auburn hair gently. “Dear Amory, dear Amory—” “Dear Beatrice—” So early in September Amory, provided with “six suits summer underwear, six suits winter underwear, one sweater or T shirt, one jersey, one overcoat, winter, etc.,” set out for New England, the land of schools. There were Andover and Exeter with their memories of New England dead—large, college-like democracies; St. Mark’s, Groton, St. Regis’—recruited from Boston and the Knickerbocker families of New York; St. Paul’s, with its great rinks; Pomfret and St. George’s, prosperous and well-dressed; Taft and Hotchkiss, which prepared the wealth of the Middle West for social success at Yale; Pawling, Westminster, Choate, Kent, and a hundred others; all milling out their well-set-up, conventional, impressive type, year after year; their mental stimulus the college entrance exams; their vague purpose set forth in a hundred circulars as “To impart a Thorough Mental, Moral, and Physical Training as a Christian Gentleman, to fit the boy for meeting the problems of his day and generation, and to give a solid foundation in the Arts and Sciences.”	one winter coat

” “Dear Beatrice	I want him to talk to you—I feel he can be such a help—” She stroked his auburn hair gently. “Dear Amory, dear Amory—” “Dear Beatrice—” So early in September Amory, provided with “six suits summer underwear, six suits winter underwear, one sweater or T shirt, one jersey, one overcoat, winter, etc.,” set out for New England, the land of schools. There were Andover and Exeter with their memories of New England dead—large, college-like democracies; St. Mark’s, Groton, St. Regis’—recruited from Boston and the Knickerbocker families of New York; St. Paul’s, with its great rinks; Pomfret and St. George’s, prosperous and well-dressed; Taft and Hotchkiss, which prepared the wealth of the Middle West for social success at Yale; Pawling, Westminster, Choate, Kent, and a hundred others; all milling out their well-set-up, conventional, impressive type, year after year; their mental stimulus the college entrance exams; their vague purpose set forth in a hundred circulars as “To impart a Thorough Mental, Moral, and Physical Training as a Christian Gentleman, to fit the boy for meeting the problems of his day and generation, and to give a solid foundation in the Arts and Sciences.”	” “Dear Beatrice

dear Amory	I want him to talk to you—I feel he can be such a help—” She stroked his auburn hair gently. “Dear Amory, dear Amory—” “Dear Beatrice—” So early in September Amory, provided with “six suits summer underwear, six suits winter underwear, one sweater or T shirt, one jersey, one overcoat, winter, etc.,” set out for New England, the land of schools. There were Andover and Exeter with their memories of New England dead—large, college-like democracies; St. Mark’s, Groton, St. Regis’—recruited from Boston and the Knickerbocker families of New York; St. Paul’s, with its great rinks; Pomfret and St. George’s, prosperous and well-dressed; Taft and Hotchkiss, which prepared the wealth of the Middle West for social success at Yale; Pawling, Westminster, Choate, Kent, and a hundred others; all milling out their well-set-up, conventional, impressive type, year after year; their mental stimulus the college entrance exams; their vague purpose set forth in a hundred circulars as “To impart a Thorough Mental, Moral, and Physical Training as a Christian Gentleman, to fit the boy for meeting the problems of his day and generation, and to give a solid foundation in the Arts and Sciences.”	dear Amory

one sweater	I want him to talk to you—I feel he can be such a help—” She stroked his auburn hair gently. “Dear Amory, dear Amory—” “Dear Beatrice—” So early in September Amory, provided with “six suits summer underwear, six suits winter underwear, one sweater or T shirt, one jersey, one overcoat, winter, etc.,” set out for New England, the land of schools. There were Andover and Exeter with their memories of New England dead—large, college-like democracies; St. Mark’s, Groton, St. Regis’—recruited from Boston and the Knickerbocker families of New York; St. Paul’s, with its great rinks; Pomfret and St. George’s, prosperous and well-dressed; Taft and Hotchkiss, which prepared the wealth of the Middle West for social success at Yale; Pawling, Westminster, Choate, Kent, and a hundred others; all milling out their well-set-up, conventional, impressive type, year after year; their mental stimulus the college entrance exams; their vague purpose set forth in a hundred circulars as “To impart a Thorough Mental, Moral, and Physical Training as a Christian Gentleman, to fit the boy for meeting the problems of his day and generation, and to give a solid foundation in the Arts and Sciences.”	one sweater

“Dear Amory	I want him to talk to you—I feel he can be such a help—” She stroked his auburn hair gently. “Dear Amory, dear Amory—” “Dear Beatrice—” So early in September Amory, provided with “six suits summer underwear, six suits winter underwear, one sweater or T shirt, one jersey, one overcoat, winter, etc.,” set out for New England, the land of schools. There were Andover and Exeter with their memories of New England dead—large, college-like democracies; St. Mark’s, Groton, St. Regis’—recruited from Boston and the Knickerbocker families of New York; St. Paul’s, with its great rinks; Pomfret and St. George’s, prosperous and well-dressed; Taft and Hotchkiss, which prepared the wealth of the Middle West for social success at Yale; Pawling, Westminster, Choate, Kent, and a hundred others; all milling out their well-set-up, conventional, impressive type, year after year; their mental stimulus the college entrance exams; their vague purpose set forth in a hundred circulars as “To impart a Thorough Mental, Moral, and Physical Training as a Christian Gentleman, to fit the boy for meeting the problems of his day and generation, and to give a solid foundation in the Arts and Sciences.”	Dear Amory

jersey, one overcoat, winter, etc.,” set out for New England, the land of schools.	I want him to talk to you—I feel he can be such a help—” She stroked his auburn hair gently. “Dear Amory, dear Amory—” “Dear Beatrice—” So early in September Amory, provided with “six suits summer underwear, six suits winter underwear, one sweater or T shirt, one jersey, one overcoat, winter, etc.,” set out for New England, the land of schools. There were Andover and Exeter with their memories of New England dead—large, college-like democracies; St. Mark’s, Groton, St. Regis’—recruited from Boston and the Knickerbocker families of New York; St. Paul’s, with its great rinks; Pomfret and St. George’s, prosperous and well-dressed; Taft and Hotchkiss, which prepared the wealth of the Middle West for social success at Yale; Pawling, Westminster, Choate, Kent, and a hundred others; all milling out their well-set-up, conventional, impressive type, year after year; their mental stimulus the college entrance exams; their vague purpose set forth in a hundred circulars as “To impart a Thorough Mental, Moral, and Physical Training as a Christian Gentleman, to fit the boy for meeting the problems of his day and generation, and to give a solid foundation in the Arts and Sciences.”	a sweater, a winter coat, and other things, he left for New England, where many boarding schools were located.

the Knickerbocker families	“Dear Amory, dear Amory—” “Dear Beatrice—” So early in September Amory, provided with “six suits summer underwear, six suits winter underwear, one sweater or T shirt, one jersey, one overcoat, winter, etc.,” set out for New England, the land of schools. There were Andover and Exeter with their memories of New England dead—large, college-like democracies; St. Mark’s, Groton, St. Regis’—recruited from Boston and the Knickerbocker families of New York; St. Paul’s, with its great rinks; Pomfret and St. George’s, prosperous and well-dressed; Taft and Hotchkiss, which prepared the wealth of the Middle West for social success at Yale; Pawling, Westminster, Choate, Kent, and a hundred others; all milling out their well-set-up, conventional, impressive type, year after year; their mental stimulus the college entrance exams; their vague purpose set forth in a hundred circulars as “To impart a Thorough Mental, Moral, and Physical Training as a Christian Gentleman, to fit the boy for meeting the problems of his day and generation, and to give a solid foundation in the Arts and Sciences.” At St. Regis’ Amory stayed three days and took his exams with a scoffing confidence, then doubling back to New York to pay his tutelary visit.	wealthy New York families

their mental stimulus	“Dear Amory, dear Amory—” “Dear Beatrice—” So early in September Amory, provided with “six suits summer underwear, six suits winter underwear, one sweater or T shirt, one jersey, one overcoat, winter, etc.,” set out for New England, the land of schools. There were Andover and Exeter with their memories of New England dead—large, college-like democracies; St. Mark’s, Groton, St. Regis’—recruited from Boston and the Knickerbocker families of New York; St. Paul’s, with its great rinks; Pomfret and St. George’s, prosperous and well-dressed; Taft and Hotchkiss, which prepared the wealth of the Middle West for social success at Yale; Pawling, Westminster, Choate, Kent, and a hundred others; all milling out their well-set-up, conventional, impressive type, year after year; their mental stimulus the college entrance exams; their vague purpose set forth in a hundred circulars as “To impart a Thorough Mental, Moral, and Physical Training as a Christian Gentleman, to fit the boy for meeting the problems of his day and generation, and to give a solid foundation in the Arts and Sciences.” At St. Regis’ Amory stayed three days and took his exams with a scoffing confidence, then doubling back to New York to pay his tutelary visit.	what motivated them academically

its great rinks	“Dear Amory, dear Amory—” “Dear Beatrice—” So early in September Amory, provided with “six suits summer underwear, six suits winter underwear, one sweater or T shirt, one jersey, one overcoat, winter, etc.,” set out for New England, the land of schools. There were Andover and Exeter with their memories of New England dead—large, college-like democracies; St. Mark’s, Groton, St. Regis’—recruited from Boston and the Knickerbocker families of New York; St. Paul’s, with its great rinks; Pomfret and St. George’s, prosperous and well-dressed; Taft and Hotchkiss, which prepared the wealth of the Middle West for social success at Yale; Pawling, Westminster, Choate, Kent, and a hundred others; all milling out their well-set-up, conventional, impressive type, year after year; their mental stimulus the college entrance exams; their vague purpose set forth in a hundred circulars as “To impart a Thorough Mental, Moral, and Physical Training as a Christian Gentleman, to fit the boy for meeting the problems of his day and generation, and to give a solid foundation in the Arts and Sciences.” At St. Regis’ Amory stayed three days and took his exams with a scoffing confidence, then doubling back to New York to pay his tutelary visit.	its large ice-skating rinks

a Thorough Mental, Moral, and Physical Training	“Dear Amory, dear Amory—” “Dear Beatrice—” So early in September Amory, provided with “six suits summer underwear, six suits winter underwear, one sweater or T shirt, one jersey, one overcoat, winter, etc.,” set out for New England, the land of schools. There were Andover and Exeter with their memories of New England dead—large, college-like democracies; St. Mark’s, Groton, St. Regis’—recruited from Boston and the Knickerbocker families of New York; St. Paul’s, with its great rinks; Pomfret and St. George’s, prosperous and well-dressed; Taft and Hotchkiss, which prepared the wealth of the Middle West for social success at Yale; Pawling, Westminster, Choate, Kent, and a hundred others; all milling out their well-set-up, conventional, impressive type, year after year; their mental stimulus the college entrance exams; their vague purpose set forth in a hundred circulars as “To impart a Thorough Mental, Moral, and Physical Training as a Christian Gentleman, to fit the boy for meeting the problems of his day and generation, and to give a solid foundation in the Arts and Sciences.” At St. Regis’ Amory stayed three days and took his exams with a scoffing confidence, then doubling back to New York to pay his tutelary visit.	Complete education of the mind, morals, and body

set forth in a hundred circulars as “To impart a Thorough Mental, Moral, and Physical Training as a Christian Gentleman, to fit the boy for meeting the problems of his day and generation, and to give a solid foundation in the Arts and Sciences.”	“Dear Amory, dear Amory—” “Dear Beatrice—” So early in September Amory, provided with “six suits summer underwear, six suits winter underwear, one sweater or T shirt, one jersey, one overcoat, winter, etc.,” set out for New England, the land of schools. There were Andover and Exeter with their memories of New England dead—large, college-like democracies; St. Mark’s, Groton, St. Regis’—recruited from Boston and the Knickerbocker families of New York; St. Paul’s, with its great rinks; Pomfret and St. George’s, prosperous and well-dressed; Taft and Hotchkiss, which prepared the wealth of the Middle West for social success at Yale; Pawling, Westminster, Choate, Kent, and a hundred others; all milling out their well-set-up, conventional, impressive type, year after year; their mental stimulus the college entrance exams; their vague purpose set forth in a hundred circulars as “To impart a Thorough Mental, Moral, and Physical Training as a Christian Gentleman, to fit the boy for meeting the problems of his day and generation, and to give a solid foundation in the Arts and Sciences.” At St. Regis’ Amory stayed three days and took his exams with a scoffing confidence, then doubling back to New York to pay his tutelary visit.	explained in their brochures as "To provide a complete mental, moral, and physical education as a Christian Gentleman, to prepare the boy to face the challenges of his time, and to give him a strong base in the Arts and Sciences."

their well-set-up, conventional, impressive type	“Dear Amory, dear Amory—” “Dear Beatrice—” So early in September Amory, provided with “six suits summer underwear, six suits winter underwear, one sweater or T shirt, one jersey, one overcoat, winter, etc.,” set out for New England, the land of schools. There were Andover and Exeter with their memories of New England dead—large, college-like democracies; St. Mark’s, Groton, St. Regis’—recruited from Boston and the Knickerbocker families of New York; St. Paul’s, with its great rinks; Pomfret and St. George’s, prosperous and well-dressed; Taft and Hotchkiss, which prepared the wealth of the Middle West for social success at Yale; Pawling, Westminster, Choate, Kent, and a hundred others; all milling out their well-set-up, conventional, impressive type, year after year; their mental stimulus the college entrance exams; their vague purpose set forth in a hundred circulars as “To impart a Thorough Mental, Moral, and Physical Training as a Christian Gentleman, to fit the boy for meeting the problems of his day and generation, and to give a solid foundation in the Arts and Sciences.” At St. Regis’ Amory stayed three days and took his exams with a scoffing confidence, then doubling back to New York to pay his tutelary visit.	their well-groomed, typical, and impressive students

their vague purpose	“Dear Amory, dear Amory—” “Dear Beatrice—” So early in September Amory, provided with “six suits summer underwear, six suits winter underwear, one sweater or T shirt, one jersey, one overcoat, winter, etc.,” set out for New England, the land of schools. There were Andover and Exeter with their memories of New England dead—large, college-like democracies; St. Mark’s, Groton, St. Regis’—recruited from Boston and the Knickerbocker families of New York; St. Paul’s, with its great rinks; Pomfret and St. George’s, prosperous and well-dressed; Taft and Hotchkiss, which prepared the wealth of the Middle West for social success at Yale; Pawling, Westminster, Choate, Kent, and a hundred others; all milling out their well-set-up, conventional, impressive type, year after year; their mental stimulus the college entrance exams; their vague purpose set forth in a hundred circulars as “To impart a Thorough Mental, Moral, and Physical Training as a Christian Gentleman, to fit the boy for meeting the problems of his day and generation, and to give a solid foundation in the Arts and Sciences.” At St. Regis’ Amory stayed three days and took his exams with a scoffing confidence, then doubling back to New York to pay his tutelary visit.	their unclear goal

a scoffing confidence	There were Andover and Exeter with their memories of New England dead—large, college-like democracies; St. Mark’s, Groton, St. Regis’—recruited from Boston and the Knickerbocker families of New York; St. Paul’s, with its great rinks; Pomfret and St. George’s, prosperous and well-dressed; Taft and Hotchkiss, which prepared the wealth of the Middle West for social success at Yale; Pawling, Westminster, Choate, Kent, and a hundred others; all milling out their well-set-up, conventional, impressive type, year after year; their mental stimulus the college entrance exams; their vague purpose set forth in a hundred circulars as “To impart a Thorough Mental, Moral, and Physical Training as a Christian Gentleman, to fit the boy for meeting the problems of his day and generation, and to give a solid foundation in the Arts and Sciences.” At St. Regis’ Amory stayed three days and took his exams with a scoffing confidence, then doubling back to New York to pay his tutelary visit. The metropolis, barely glimpsed, made little impression on him, except for the sense of cleanliness he drew from the tall white buildings seen from a Hudson River steamboat in the early morning.	a mocking confidence

his tutelary visit	There were Andover and Exeter with their memories of New England dead—large, college-like democracies; St. Mark’s, Groton, St. Regis’—recruited from Boston and the Knickerbocker families of New York; St. Paul’s, with its great rinks; Pomfret and St. George’s, prosperous and well-dressed; Taft and Hotchkiss, which prepared the wealth of the Middle West for social success at Yale; Pawling, Westminster, Choate, Kent, and a hundred others; all milling out their well-set-up, conventional, impressive type, year after year; their mental stimulus the college entrance exams; their vague purpose set forth in a hundred circulars as “To impart a Thorough Mental, Moral, and Physical Training as a Christian Gentleman, to fit the boy for meeting the problems of his day and generation, and to give a solid foundation in the Arts and Sciences.” At St. Regis’ Amory stayed three days and took his exams with a scoffing confidence, then doubling back to New York to pay his tutelary visit. The metropolis, barely glimpsed, made little impression on him, except for the sense of cleanliness he drew from the tall white buildings seen from a Hudson River steamboat in the early morning.	his required visit

doubling back to New York to pay his tutelary visit.	There were Andover and Exeter with their memories of New England dead—large, college-like democracies; St. Mark’s, Groton, St. Regis’—recruited from Boston and the Knickerbocker families of New York; St. Paul’s, with its great rinks; Pomfret and St. George’s, prosperous and well-dressed; Taft and Hotchkiss, which prepared the wealth of the Middle West for social success at Yale; Pawling, Westminster, Choate, Kent, and a hundred others; all milling out their well-set-up, conventional, impressive type, year after year; their mental stimulus the college entrance exams; their vague purpose set forth in a hundred circulars as “To impart a Thorough Mental, Moral, and Physical Training as a Christian Gentleman, to fit the boy for meeting the problems of his day and generation, and to give a solid foundation in the Arts and Sciences.” At St. Regis’ Amory stayed three days and took his exams with a scoffing confidence, then doubling back to New York to pay his tutelary visit. The metropolis, barely glimpsed, made little impression on him, except for the sense of cleanliness he drew from the tall white buildings seen from a Hudson River steamboat in the early morning.	returning to New York for his required visit.

a Hudson River steamboat	At St. Regis’ Amory stayed three days and took his exams with a scoffing confidence, then doubling back to New York to pay his tutelary visit. The metropolis, barely glimpsed, made little impression on him, except for the sense of cleanliness he drew from the tall white buildings seen from a Hudson River steamboat in the early morning. Indeed, his mind was so crowded with dreams of athletic prowess at school that he considered this visit only as a rather tiresome prelude to the great adventure.	a steamboat on the Hudson River

sense of cleanliness he drew from the tall white buildings seen from a Hudson River steamboat in the early morning.	At St. Regis’ Amory stayed three days and took his exams with a scoffing confidence, then doubling back to New York to pay his tutelary visit. The metropolis, barely glimpsed, made little impression on him, except for the sense of cleanliness he drew from the tall white buildings seen from a Hudson River steamboat in the early morning. Indeed, his mind was so crowded with dreams of athletic prowess at school that he considered this visit only as a rather tiresome prelude to the great adventure.	the feeling of cleanness he got from seeing the tall, white buildings from a steamboat on the Hudson River early in the morning.

crowded with dreams of athletic prowess at school that he considered this visit only as a rather tiresome prelude to the great adventure.	The metropolis, barely glimpsed, made little impression on him, except for the sense of cleanliness he drew from the tall white buildings seen from a Hudson River steamboat in the early morning. Indeed, his mind was so crowded with dreams of athletic prowess at school that he considered this visit only as a rather tiresome prelude to the great adventure. This, however, it did not prove to be.	He was too focused on his hopes of being a sports star at school to care much about the visit, seeing it as just a boring lead-up to the exciting stuff.

athletic prowess	The metropolis, barely glimpsed, made little impression on him, except for the sense of cleanliness he drew from the tall white buildings seen from a Hudson River steamboat in the early morning. Indeed, his mind was so crowded with dreams of athletic prowess at school that he considered this visit only as a rather tiresome prelude to the great adventure. This, however, it did not prove to be.	athletic skill

a rather tiresome prelude	The metropolis, barely glimpsed, made little impression on him, except for the sense of cleanliness he drew from the tall white buildings seen from a Hudson River steamboat in the early morning. Indeed, his mind was so crowded with dreams of athletic prowess at school that he considered this visit only as a rather tiresome prelude to the great adventure. This, however, it did not prove to be.	a somewhat boring introduction

hill overlooking the river, and there lived its owner, between his trips to all parts of the Roman-Catholic world, rather like an exiled Stuart king waiting to be called to the rule of his land.	This, however, it did not prove to be. Monsignor Darcy’s house was an ancient, rambling structure set on a hill overlooking the river, and there lived its owner, between his trips to all parts of the Roman-Catholic world, rather like an exiled Stuart king waiting to be called to the rule of his land. Monsignor was forty-four then, and bustling—a trifle too stout for symmetry, with hair the color of spun gold, and a brilliant, enveloping personality.	hill overlooking the river, where its owner lived between travels around the Roman-Catholic world, almost like a Stuart king in exile waiting to reclaim his throne.

an exiled Stuart king	This, however, it did not prove to be. Monsignor Darcy’s house was an ancient, rambling structure set on a hill overlooking the river, and there lived its owner, between his trips to all parts of the Roman-Catholic world, rather like an exiled Stuart king waiting to be called to the rule of his land. Monsignor was forty-four then, and bustling—a trifle too stout for symmetry, with hair the color of spun gold, and a brilliant, enveloping personality.	like a king in exile

Monsignor Darcy’s house	This, however, it did not prove to be. Monsignor Darcy’s house was an ancient, rambling structure set on a hill overlooking the river, and there lived its owner, between his trips to all parts of the Roman-Catholic world, rather like an exiled Stuart king waiting to be called to the rule of his land. Monsignor was forty-four then, and bustling—a trifle too stout for symmetry, with hair the color of spun gold, and a brilliant, enveloping personality.	Monsignor Darcy's house

an ancient, rambling structure	This, however, it did not prove to be. Monsignor Darcy’s house was an ancient, rambling structure set on a hill overlooking the river, and there lived its owner, between his trips to all parts of the Roman-Catholic world, rather like an exiled Stuart king waiting to be called to the rule of his land. Monsignor was forty-four then, and bustling—a trifle too stout for symmetry, with hair the color of spun gold, and a brilliant, enveloping personality.	an old, sprawling building

stout for symmetry, with hair the color of spun gold, and a brilliant, enveloping personality.	Monsignor Darcy’s house was an ancient, rambling structure set on a hill overlooking the river, and there lived its owner, between his trips to all parts of the Roman-Catholic world, rather like an exiled Stuart king waiting to be called to the rule of his land. Monsignor was forty-four then, and bustling—a trifle too stout for symmetry, with hair the color of spun gold, and a brilliant, enveloping personality. When he came into a room clad in his full purple regalia from thatch to toe, he resembled a Turner sunset, and attracted both admiration and attention.	a bit overweight, with golden hair, and a charming, all-encompassing personality.

resembled a Turner sunset, and attracted both admiration and attention.	Monsignor was forty-four then, and bustling—a trifle too stout for symmetry, with hair the color of spun gold, and a brilliant, enveloping personality. When he came into a room clad in his full purple regalia from thatch to toe, he resembled a Turner sunset, and attracted both admiration and attention. He had written two novels: one of them violently anti-Catholic, just before his conversion, and five years later another, in which he had attempted to turn all his clever jibes against Catholics into even cleverer innuendoes against Episcopalians.	looked like a vibrant sunset and drew both praise and notice.

his full purple regalia	Monsignor was forty-four then, and bustling—a trifle too stout for symmetry, with hair the color of spun gold, and a brilliant, enveloping personality. When he came into a room clad in his full purple regalia from thatch to toe, he resembled a Turner sunset, and attracted both admiration and attention. He had written two novels: one of them violently anti-Catholic, just before his conversion, and five years later another, in which he had attempted to turn all his clever jibes against Catholics into even cleverer innuendoes against Episcopalians.	his complete purple outfit

all his clever jibes	When he came into a room clad in his full purple regalia from thatch to toe, he resembled a Turner sunset, and attracted both admiration and attention. He had written two novels: one of them violently anti-Catholic, just before his conversion, and five years later another, in which he had attempted to turn all his clever jibes against Catholics into even cleverer innuendoes against Episcopalians. He was intensely ritualistic, startlingly dramatic, loved the idea of God enough to be a celibate, and rather liked his neighbor.	all his clever jokes

even cleverer innuendoes	When he came into a room clad in his full purple regalia from thatch to toe, he resembled a Turner sunset, and attracted both admiration and attention. He had written two novels: one of them violently anti-Catholic, just before his conversion, and five years later another, in which he had attempted to turn all his clever jibes against Catholics into even cleverer innuendoes against Episcopalians. He was intensely ritualistic, startlingly dramatic, loved the idea of God enough to be a celibate, and rather liked his neighbor.	even more clever indirect insults

innuendoes against Episcopalians.	When he came into a room clad in his full purple regalia from thatch to toe, he resembled a Turner sunset, and attracted both admiration and attention. He had written two novels: one of them violently anti-Catholic, just before his conversion, and five years later another, in which he had attempted to turn all his clever jibes against Catholics into even cleverer innuendoes against Episcopalians. He was intensely ritualistic, startlingly dramatic, loved the idea of God enough to be a celibate, and rather liked his neighbor.	subtle insults aimed at Episcopalians.

idea of God enough to be a celibate, and rather liked his neighbor.	He had written two novels: one of them violently anti-Catholic, just before his conversion, and five years later another, in which he had attempted to turn all his clever jibes against Catholics into even cleverer innuendoes against Episcopalians. He was intensely ritualistic, startlingly dramatic, loved the idea of God enough to be a celibate, and rather liked his neighbor. Children adored him because he was like a child; youth revelled in his company because he was still a youth, and couldn’t be shocked.	He loved the idea of God enough to remain celibate, and he quite liked the people around him.

was still a youth, and couldn’t be shocked.	He was intensely ritualistic, startlingly dramatic, loved the idea of God enough to be a celibate, and rather liked his neighbor. Children adored him because he was like a child; youth revelled in his company because he was still a youth, and couldn’t be shocked. In the proper land and century he might have been a Richelieu—at present he was a very moral, very religious (if not particularly pious) clergyman, making a great mystery about pulling rusty wires, and appreciating life to the fullest, if not entirely enjoying it.	was still young at heart and couldn't be easily offended.

mystery about pulling rusty wires, and appreciating life to the fullest, if not entirely enjoying it.	Children adored him because he was like a child; youth revelled in his company because he was still a youth, and couldn’t be shocked. In the proper land and century he might have been a Richelieu—at present he was a very moral, very religious (if not particularly pious) clergyman, making a great mystery about pulling rusty wires, and appreciating life to the fullest, if not entirely enjoying it. He and Amory took to each other at first sight—the jovial, impressive prelate who could dazzle an embassy ball, and the green-eyed, intent youth, in his first long trousers, accepted in their own minds a relation of father and son within a half-hour’s conversation.	He made a big deal out of simple things, and he loved life even if he didn't always have fun.

rusty wires	Children adored him because he was like a child; youth revelled in his company because he was still a youth, and couldn’t be shocked. In the proper land and century he might have been a Richelieu—at present he was a very moral, very religious (if not particularly pious) clergyman, making a great mystery about pulling rusty wires, and appreciating life to the fullest, if not entirely enjoying it. He and Amory took to each other at first sight—the jovial, impressive prelate who could dazzle an embassy ball, and the green-eyed, intent youth, in his first long trousers, accepted in their own minds a relation of father and son within a half-hour’s conversation.	difficult or complicated matters

a very moral, very religious (if not particularly pious) clergyman	Children adored him because he was like a child; youth revelled in his company because he was still a youth, and couldn’t be shocked. In the proper land and century he might have been a Richelieu—at present he was a very moral, very religious (if not particularly pious) clergyman, making a great mystery about pulling rusty wires, and appreciating life to the fullest, if not entirely enjoying it. He and Amory took to each other at first sight—the jovial, impressive prelate who could dazzle an embassy ball, and the green-eyed, intent youth, in his first long trousers, accepted in their own minds a relation of father and son within a half-hour’s conversation.	a very moral and religious clergyman, though not particularly devout

a half-hour’s conversation	In the proper land and century he might have been a Richelieu—at present he was a very moral, very religious (if not particularly pious) clergyman, making a great mystery about pulling rusty wires, and appreciating life to the fullest, if not entirely enjoying it. He and Amory took to each other at first sight—the jovial, impressive prelate who could dazzle an embassy ball, and the green-eyed, intent youth, in his first long trousers, accepted in their own minds a relation of father and son within a half-hour’s conversation. “My dear boy, I’ve been waiting to see you for years.	a thirty-minute chat

the jovial, impressive prelate	In the proper land and century he might have been a Richelieu—at present he was a very moral, very religious (if not particularly pious) clergyman, making a great mystery about pulling rusty wires, and appreciating life to the fullest, if not entirely enjoying it. He and Amory took to each other at first sight—the jovial, impressive prelate who could dazzle an embassy ball, and the green-eyed, intent youth, in his first long trousers, accepted in their own minds a relation of father and son within a half-hour’s conversation. “My dear boy, I’ve been waiting to see you for years.	the cheerful, important clergyman

sight—the jovial, impressive prelate who could dazzle an embassy ball, and the green-eyed, intent youth, in his first long trousers, accepted in their own minds a relation of father and son within a half-hour’s conversation.	In the proper land and century he might have been a Richelieu—at present he was a very moral, very religious (if not particularly pious) clergyman, making a great mystery about pulling rusty wires, and appreciating life to the fullest, if not entirely enjoying it. He and Amory took to each other at first sight—the jovial, impressive prelate who could dazzle an embassy ball, and the green-eyed, intent youth, in his first long trousers, accepted in their own minds a relation of father and son within a half-hour’s conversation. “My dear boy, I’ve been waiting to see you for years.	sight—the friendly, impressive clergyman, who could charm people at a fancy diplomatic party, and the eager, green-eyed young man, in his first grown-up pants, immediately felt like father and son after talking for just half an hour.

his first long trousers	In the proper land and century he might have been a Richelieu—at present he was a very moral, very religious (if not particularly pious) clergyman, making a great mystery about pulling rusty wires, and appreciating life to the fullest, if not entirely enjoying it. He and Amory took to each other at first sight—the jovial, impressive prelate who could dazzle an embassy ball, and the green-eyed, intent youth, in his first long trousers, accepted in their own minds a relation of father and son within a half-hour’s conversation. “My dear boy, I’ve been waiting to see you for years.	his first grown-up pants

come from school—St. Regis’s, you know.”	Take a big chair and we’ll have a chat.” “I’ve just come from school—St. Regis’s, you know.” “So your mother says—a remarkable woman; have a cigarette—I’m sure you smoke.	I just came from school, St. Regis's.

says—a remarkable woman; have a cigarette—I’m sure you smoke.	“I’ve just come from school—St. Regis’s, you know.” “So your mother says—a remarkable woman; have a cigarette—I’m sure you smoke. Well, if you’re like me, you loathe all science and mathematics—” Amory nodded vehemently.	says—your mother is remarkable; have a cigarette—I bet you smoke.

loathe all science and mathematics—” Amory nodded vehemently.	“So your mother says—a remarkable woman; have a cigarette—I’m sure you smoke. Well, if you’re like me, you loathe all science and mathematics—” Amory nodded vehemently. “Hate ’em all.	Hate all science and math." Amory nodded enthusiastically.

’em all.	Well, if you’re like me, you loathe all science and mathematics—” Amory nodded vehemently. “Hate ’em all. Like English and history.”	Them all.

hate school for a while, too, but I’m glad you’re going to St. Regis’s.”	“Of course. You’ll hate school for a while, too, but I’m glad you’re going to St. Regis’s.” “Why?”	You'll hate school for a bit, but I'm happy you're going to St. Regis's.

a gentleman’s school	“Why?” “Because it’s a gentleman’s school, and democracy won’t hit you so early. You’ll find plenty of that in college.”	a private school

go to Princeton,” said Amory.	You’ll find plenty of that in college.” “I want to go to Princeton,” said Amory. “I don’t know why, but I think of all Harvard men as sissies, like I used to be, and all Yale men as wearing big blue sweaters and smoking pipes.”	Amory said he wanted to go to Princeton.

men as sissies, like I used to be, and all Yale men as wearing big blue sweaters and smoking pipes.”	“I want to go to Princeton,” said Amory. “I don’t know why, but I think of all Harvard men as sissies, like I used to be, and all Yale men as wearing big blue sweaters and smoking pipes.” Monsignor chuckled.	Harvard guys are soft, like I used to be, and Yale guys wear preppy sweaters and smoke pipes.

big blue sweaters	“I want to go to Princeton,” said Amory. “I don’t know why, but I think of all Harvard men as sissies, like I used to be, and all Yale men as wearing big blue sweaters and smoking pipes.” Monsignor chuckled.	big blue sweaters

think of Princeton as being lazy and good-looking and aristocratic—you know, like a spring day.	“I’m one, you know.” “Oh, you’re different—I think of Princeton as being lazy and good-looking and aristocratic—you know, like a spring day. Harvard seems sort of indoors—” “And Yale is November, crisp and energetic,” finished Monsignor.	Princeton is lazy, good-looking, and upper-class, like a spring day.

” finished Monsignor	“Oh, you’re different—I think of Princeton as being lazy and good-looking and aristocratic—you know, like a spring day. Harvard seems sort of indoors—” “And Yale is November, crisp and energetic,” finished Monsignor. “That’s it.”	"finished Monsignor."

was for Bonnie Prince Charlie,” announced Amory.	They slipped briskly into an intimacy from which they never recovered. “I was for Bonnie Prince Charlie,” announced Amory. “Of course you were—and for Hannibal—” “Yes, and for the Southern Confederacy.”	I supported Bonnie Prince Charlie, Amory announced.

the Southern Confederacy	“I was for Bonnie Prince Charlie,” announced Amory. “Of course you were—and for Hannibal—” “Yes, and for the Southern Confederacy.” He was rather sceptical about being an Irish patriot—he suspected that being Irish was being somewhat common—but Monsignor assured him that Ireland was a romantic lost cause and Irish people quite charming, and that it should, by all means, be one of his principal biases.	the South in the Civil War

an Irish patriot	“Of course you were—and for Hannibal—” “Yes, and for the Southern Confederacy.” He was rather sceptical about being an Irish patriot—he suspected that being Irish was being somewhat common—but Monsignor assured him that Ireland was a romantic lost cause and Irish people quite charming, and that it should, by all means, be one of his principal biases. After a crowded hour which included several more cigarettes, and during which Monsignor learned, to his surprise but not to his horror, that Amory had not been brought up a Catholic, he announced that he had another guest.	someone who supports Irish independence

be one of his principal biases.	“Of course you were—and for Hannibal—” “Yes, and for the Southern Confederacy.” He was rather sceptical about being an Irish patriot—he suspected that being Irish was being somewhat common—but Monsignor assured him that Ireland was a romantic lost cause and Irish people quite charming, and that it should, by all means, be one of his principal biases. After a crowded hour which included several more cigarettes, and during which Monsignor learned, to his surprise but not to his horror, that Amory had not been brought up a Catholic, he announced that he had another guest.	be something he strongly believed in.

a crowded hour	He was rather sceptical about being an Irish patriot—he suspected that being Irish was being somewhat common—but Monsignor assured him that Ireland was a romantic lost cause and Irish people quite charming, and that it should, by all means, be one of his principal biases. After a crowded hour which included several more cigarettes, and during which Monsignor learned, to his surprise but not to his horror, that Amory had not been brought up a Catholic, he announced that he had another guest. This turned out to be the Honorable Thornton Hancock, of Boston, ex-minister to The Hague, author of an erudite history of the Middle Ages and the last of a distinguished, patriotic, and brilliant family.	a busy hour

hour which included several more cigarettes, and during which Monsignor learned, to his surprise but not to his horror, that Amory had not been brought up a Catholic, he announced that he had another guest.	He was rather sceptical about being an Irish patriot—he suspected that being Irish was being somewhat common—but Monsignor assured him that Ireland was a romantic lost cause and Irish people quite charming, and that it should, by all means, be one of his principal biases. After a crowded hour which included several more cigarettes, and during which Monsignor learned, to his surprise but not to his horror, that Amory had not been brought up a Catholic, he announced that he had another guest. This turned out to be the Honorable Thornton Hancock, of Boston, ex-minister to The Hague, author of an erudite history of the Middle Ages and the last of a distinguished, patriotic, and brilliant family.	During that hour, they smoked more cigarettes, and the Monsignor, surprised but not horrified to learn Amory wasn't raised Catholic, announced another guest was coming.

the Honorable Thornton Hancock	After a crowded hour which included several more cigarettes, and during which Monsignor learned, to his surprise but not to his horror, that Amory had not been brought up a Catholic, he announced that he had another guest. This turned out to be the Honorable Thornton Hancock, of Boston, ex-minister to The Hague, author of an erudite history of the Middle Ages and the last of a distinguished, patriotic, and brilliant family. “He comes here for a rest,” said Monsignor confidentially, treating Amory as a contemporary.	Thornton Hancock

last of a distinguished, patriotic, and brilliant family.	After a crowded hour which included several more cigarettes, and during which Monsignor learned, to his surprise but not to his horror, that Amory had not been brought up a Catholic, he announced that he had another guest. This turned out to be the Honorable Thornton Hancock, of Boston, ex-minister to The Hague, author of an erudite history of the Middle Ages and the last of a distinguished, patriotic, and brilliant family. “He comes here for a rest,” said Monsignor confidentially, treating Amory as a contemporary.	the final member of a respected, patriotic, and talented family.

a distinguished, patriotic, and brilliant family	After a crowded hour which included several more cigarettes, and during which Monsignor learned, to his surprise but not to his horror, that Amory had not been brought up a Catholic, he announced that he had another guest. This turned out to be the Honorable Thornton Hancock, of Boston, ex-minister to The Hague, author of an erudite history of the Middle Ages and the last of a distinguished, patriotic, and brilliant family. “He comes here for a rest,” said Monsignor confidentially, treating Amory as a contemporary.	a family that was well-known, patriotic, and intelligent

an erudite history	After a crowded hour which included several more cigarettes, and during which Monsignor learned, to his surprise but not to his horror, that Amory had not been brought up a Catholic, he announced that he had another guest. This turned out to be the Honorable Thornton Hancock, of Boston, ex-minister to The Hague, author of an erudite history of the Middle Ages and the last of a distinguished, patriotic, and brilliant family. “He comes here for a rest,” said Monsignor confidentially, treating Amory as a contemporary.	a scholarly history

said Monsignor confidentially, treating Amory as a contemporary.	This turned out to be the Honorable Thornton Hancock, of Boston, ex-minister to The Hague, author of an erudite history of the Middle Ages and the last of a distinguished, patriotic, and brilliant family. “He comes here for a rest,” said Monsignor confidentially, treating Amory as a contemporary. “I act as an escape from the weariness of agnosticism, and I think I’m the only man who knows how his staid old mind is really at sea and longs for a sturdy spar like the Church to cling to.”	the Monsignor said privately, acting as if Amory was his equal.

his staid old mind	“He comes here for a rest,” said Monsignor confidentially, treating Amory as a contemporary. “I act as an escape from the weariness of agnosticism, and I think I’m the only man who knows how his staid old mind is really at sea and longs for a sturdy spar like the Church to cling to.” Their first luncheon was one of the memorable events of Amory’s early life.	his settled old mind

is really at sea and longs for a sturdy spar like the Church to cling to.”	“He comes here for a rest,” said Monsignor confidentially, treating Amory as a contemporary. “I act as an escape from the weariness of agnosticism, and I think I’m the only man who knows how his staid old mind is really at sea and longs for a sturdy spar like the Church to cling to.” Their first luncheon was one of the memorable events of Amory’s early life.	is truly lost and wants something strong like the Church to hold onto."

a sturdy spar	“He comes here for a rest,” said Monsignor confidentially, treating Amory as a contemporary. “I act as an escape from the weariness of agnosticism, and I think I’m the only man who knows how his staid old mind is really at sea and longs for a sturdy spar like the Church to cling to.” Their first luncheon was one of the memorable events of Amory’s early life.	something reliable to hold onto

Their first luncheon	“I act as an escape from the weariness of agnosticism, and I think I’m the only man who knows how his staid old mind is really at sea and longs for a sturdy spar like the Church to cling to.” Their first luncheon was one of the memorable events of Amory’s early life. He was quite radiant and gave off a peculiar brightness and charm.	Their first lunch.

Amory’s early life	“I act as an escape from the weariness of agnosticism, and I think I’m the only man who knows how his staid old mind is really at sea and longs for a sturdy spar like the Church to cling to.” Their first luncheon was one of the memorable events of Amory’s early life. He was quite radiant and gave off a peculiar brightness and charm.	Amory's young life.

the memorable events	“I act as an escape from the weariness of agnosticism, and I think I’m the only man who knows how his staid old mind is really at sea and longs for a sturdy spar like the Church to cling to.” Their first luncheon was one of the memorable events of Amory’s early life. He was quite radiant and gave off a peculiar brightness and charm.	memorable events

one of the memorable events of Amory’s early life.	“I act as an escape from the weariness of agnosticism, and I think I’m the only man who knows how his staid old mind is really at sea and longs for a sturdy spar like the Church to cling to.” Their first luncheon was one of the memorable events of Amory’s early life. He was quite radiant and gave off a peculiar brightness and charm.	a highlight of Amory's young life.

a peculiar brightness	Their first luncheon was one of the memorable events of Amory’s early life. He was quite radiant and gave off a peculiar brightness and charm. Monsignor called out the best that he had thought by question and suggestion, and Amory talked with an ingenious brilliance of a thousand impulses and desires and repulsions and faiths and fears.	a strange radiance

a thousand impulses	He was quite radiant and gave off a peculiar brightness and charm. Monsignor called out the best that he had thought by question and suggestion, and Amory talked with an ingenious brilliance of a thousand impulses and desires and repulsions and faiths and fears. He and Monsignor held the floor, and the older man, with his less receptive, less accepting, yet certainly not colder mentality, seemed content to listen and bask in the mellow sunshine that played between these two.	a thousand urges

thought by question and suggestion, and Amory talked with an ingenious brilliance of a thousand impulses and desires and repulsions and faiths and fears.	He was quite radiant and gave off a peculiar brightness and charm. Monsignor called out the best that he had thought by question and suggestion, and Amory talked with an ingenious brilliance of a thousand impulses and desires and repulsions and faiths and fears. He and Monsignor held the floor, and the older man, with his less receptive, less accepting, yet certainly not colder mentality, seemed content to listen and bask in the mellow sunshine that played between these two.	prompted by questions and ideas, Amory spoke with clever passion about his many urges, wants, dislikes, beliefs, and anxieties.

an ingenious brilliance	He was quite radiant and gave off a peculiar brightness and charm. Monsignor called out the best that he had thought by question and suggestion, and Amory talked with an ingenious brilliance of a thousand impulses and desires and repulsions and faiths and fears. He and Monsignor held the floor, and the older man, with his less receptive, less accepting, yet certainly not colder mentality, seemed content to listen and bask in the mellow sunshine that played between these two.	clever intelligence

certainly not colder mentality	Monsignor called out the best that he had thought by question and suggestion, and Amory talked with an ingenious brilliance of a thousand impulses and desires and repulsions and faiths and fears. He and Monsignor held the floor, and the older man, with his less receptive, less accepting, yet certainly not colder mentality, seemed content to listen and bask in the mellow sunshine that played between these two. Monsignor gave the effect of sunlight to many people; Amory gave it in his youth and, to some extent, when he was very much older, but never again was it quite so mutually spontaneous.	definitely not a less caring mind

the mellow sunshine	Monsignor called out the best that he had thought by question and suggestion, and Amory talked with an ingenious brilliance of a thousand impulses and desires and repulsions and faiths and fears. He and Monsignor held the floor, and the older man, with his less receptive, less accepting, yet certainly not colder mentality, seemed content to listen and bask in the mellow sunshine that played between these two. Monsignor gave the effect of sunlight to many people; Amory gave it in his youth and, to some extent, when he was very much older, but never again was it quite so mutually spontaneous.	the warm, pleasant feeling

effect of sunlight to many people; Amory gave it in his youth and, to some extent, when he was very much older, but never again was it quite so mutually spontaneous.	He and Monsignor held the floor, and the older man, with his less receptive, less accepting, yet certainly not colder mentality, seemed content to listen and bask in the mellow sunshine that played between these two. Monsignor gave the effect of sunlight to many people; Amory gave it in his youth and, to some extent, when he was very much older, but never again was it quite so mutually spontaneous. “He’s a radiant boy,” thought Thornton Hancock, who had seen the splendor of two continents and talked with Parnell and Gladstone and Bismarck—and afterward he added to Monsignor: “But his education ought not to be entrusted to a school or college.”	Monsignor made many people feel good; Amory did too when he was younger and even later in life, but it was never quite as natural for both of them at the same time.

a radiant boy	Monsignor gave the effect of sunlight to many people; Amory gave it in his youth and, to some extent, when he was very much older, but never again was it quite so mutually spontaneous. “He’s a radiant boy,” thought Thornton Hancock, who had seen the splendor of two continents and talked with Parnell and Gladstone and Bismarck—and afterward he added to Monsignor: “But his education ought not to be entrusted to a school or college.” But for the next four years the best of Amory’s intellect was concentrated on matters of popularity, the intricacies of a university social system and American Society as represented by Biltmore Teas and Hot Springs golf-links.	A bright and cheerful boy.

splendor of two continents and talked with Parnell and Gladstone and Bismarck—and afterward he added to Monsignor: “But his education ought not to be entrusted to a school or college.”	Monsignor gave the effect of sunlight to many people; Amory gave it in his youth and, to some extent, when he was very much older, but never again was it quite so mutually spontaneous. “He’s a radiant boy,” thought Thornton Hancock, who had seen the splendor of two continents and talked with Parnell and Gladstone and Bismarck—and afterward he added to Monsignor: “But his education ought not to be entrusted to a school or college.” But for the next four years the best of Amory’s intellect was concentrated on matters of popularity, the intricacies of a university social system and American Society as represented by Biltmore Teas and Hot Springs golf-links.	the magnificence of two continents and spoken with Parnell, Gladstone, and Bismarck—and later told Monsignor, "His education shouldn't be left to a school or college."

Amory’s intellect	“He’s a radiant boy,” thought Thornton Hancock, who had seen the splendor of two continents and talked with Parnell and Gladstone and Bismarck—and afterward he added to Monsignor: “But his education ought not to be entrusted to a school or college.” But for the next four years the best of Amory’s intellect was concentrated on matters of popularity, the intricacies of a university social system and American Society as represented by Biltmore Teas and Hot Springs golf-links. In all, a wonderful week, that saw Amory’s mind turned inside out, a hundred of his theories confirmed, and his joy of life crystallized to a thousand ambitions.	Amory's intelligence

matters of popularity, the intricacies of a university social system and American Society as represented by Biltmore Teas and Hot Springs golf-links.	“He’s a radiant boy,” thought Thornton Hancock, who had seen the splendor of two continents and talked with Parnell and Gladstone and Bismarck—and afterward he added to Monsignor: “But his education ought not to be entrusted to a school or college.” But for the next four years the best of Amory’s intellect was concentrated on matters of popularity, the intricacies of a university social system and American Society as represented by Biltmore Teas and Hot Springs golf-links. In all, a wonderful week, that saw Amory’s mind turned inside out, a hundred of his theories confirmed, and his joy of life crystallized to a thousand ambitions.	being popular, understanding the complicated social rules of college, and experiencing American high society through fancy tea parties and golf trips.

Biltmore Teas and Hot Springs golf-links	“He’s a radiant boy,” thought Thornton Hancock, who had seen the splendor of two continents and talked with Parnell and Gladstone and Bismarck—and afterward he added to Monsignor: “But his education ought not to be entrusted to a school or college.” But for the next four years the best of Amory’s intellect was concentrated on matters of popularity, the intricacies of a university social system and American Society as represented by Biltmore Teas and Hot Springs golf-links. In all, a wonderful week, that saw Amory’s mind turned inside out, a hundred of his theories confirmed, and his joy of life crystallized to a thousand ambitions.	fancy tea parties and golf courses

joy of life crystallized to a thousand ambitions.	But for the next four years the best of Amory’s intellect was concentrated on matters of popularity, the intricacies of a university social system and American Society as represented by Biltmore Teas and Hot Springs golf-links. In all, a wonderful week, that saw Amory’s mind turned inside out, a hundred of his theories confirmed, and his joy of life crystallized to a thousand ambitions. Not that the conversation was scholastic—heaven forbid!	His happiness turned into countless goals.

Amory’s mind	But for the next four years the best of Amory’s intellect was concentrated on matters of popularity, the intricacies of a university social system and American Society as represented by Biltmore Teas and Hot Springs golf-links. In all, a wonderful week, that saw Amory’s mind turned inside out, a hundred of his theories confirmed, and his joy of life crystallized to a thousand ambitions. Not that the conversation was scholastic—heaven forbid!	Amory's thoughts

a thousand ambitions	But for the next four years the best of Amory’s intellect was concentrated on matters of popularity, the intricacies of a university social system and American Society as represented by Biltmore Teas and Hot Springs golf-links. In all, a wonderful week, that saw Amory’s mind turned inside out, a hundred of his theories confirmed, and his joy of life crystallized to a thousand ambitions. Not that the conversation was scholastic—heaven forbid!	many goals

The Beloved Vagabond	Not that the conversation was scholastic—heaven forbid! Amory had only the vaguest idea as to what Bernard Shaw was—but Monsignor made quite as much out of The Beloved Vagabond and Sir Nigel, taking good care that Amory never once felt out of his depth. But the trumpets were sounding for Amory’s preliminary skirmish with his own generation.	The Beloved Vagabond

idea as to what Bernard Shaw was—but Monsignor made quite as much out of The Beloved Vagabond and Sir Nigel, taking good care that Amory never once felt out of his depth.	Not that the conversation was scholastic—heaven forbid! Amory had only the vaguest idea as to what Bernard Shaw was—but Monsignor made quite as much out of The Beloved Vagabond and Sir Nigel, taking good care that Amory never once felt out of his depth. But the trumpets were sounding for Amory’s preliminary skirmish with his own generation.	idea who Bernard Shaw even was, but Monsignor talked about The Beloved Vagabond and Sir Nigel just as much, making sure Amory always understood.

only the vaguest idea	Not that the conversation was scholastic—heaven forbid! Amory had only the vaguest idea as to what Bernard Shaw was—but Monsignor made quite as much out of The Beloved Vagabond and Sir Nigel, taking good care that Amory never once felt out of his depth. But the trumpets were sounding for Amory’s preliminary skirmish with his own generation.	almost no idea

Amory’s preliminary skirmish	Amory had only the vaguest idea as to what Bernard Shaw was—but Monsignor made quite as much out of The Beloved Vagabond and Sir Nigel, taking good care that Amory never once felt out of his depth. But the trumpets were sounding for Amory’s preliminary skirmish with his own generation. “You’re not sorry to go, of course.	Amory's first fight

skirmish with his own generation.	Amory had only the vaguest idea as to what Bernard Shaw was—but Monsignor made quite as much out of The Beloved Vagabond and Sir Nigel, taking good care that Amory never once felt out of his depth. But the trumpets were sounding for Amory’s preliminary skirmish with his own generation. “You’re not sorry to go, of course.	first encounter with people his own age.

’re not sorry to go, of course.	But the trumpets were sounding for Amory’s preliminary skirmish with his own generation. “You’re not sorry to go, of course. With people like us our home is where we are not,” said Monsignor.	You're not sad to leave, of course.

people like us our home is where we are not,” said Monsignor.	“You’re not sorry to go, of course. With people like us our home is where we are not,” said Monsignor. “I am sorry—” “No, you’re not.	People like us feel at home anywhere but where we are.

“Well—” “Goodbye	No one person in the world is necessary to you or to me.” “Well—” “Goodbye.”	"Well-" "Goodbye."

 Amory’s two years	Amory’s two years at St. Regis’, though in turn painful and triumphant, had as little real significance in his own life as the American “prep” school, crushed as it is under the heel of the universities, has to American life in general. We have no Eton to create the self-consciousness of a governing class; we have, instead, clean, flaccid and innocuous preparatory schools.	Amory's two years

had as little real significance in his own life as the American “prep” school, crushed as it is under the heel of the universities, has to American life in general.	Amory’s two years at St. Regis’, though in turn painful and triumphant, had as little real significance in his own life as the American “prep” school, crushed as it is under the heel of the universities, has to American life in general. We have no Eton to create the self-consciousness of a governing class; we have, instead, clean, flaccid and innocuous preparatory schools.	mattered little to his life, just as American prep schools, controlled by universities, matter little to American life.

clean, flaccid and innocuous preparatory schools	Amory’s two years at St. Regis’, though in turn painful and triumphant, had as little real significance in his own life as the American “prep” school, crushed as it is under the heel of the universities, has to American life in general. We have no Eton to create the self-consciousness of a governing class; we have, instead, clean, flaccid and innocuous preparatory schools. He went all wrong at the start, was generally considered both conceited and arrogant, and universally detested.	inoffensive and weak prep schools

a governing class	Amory’s two years at St. Regis’, though in turn painful and triumphant, had as little real significance in his own life as the American “prep” school, crushed as it is under the heel of the universities, has to American life in general. We have no Eton to create the self-consciousness of a governing class; we have, instead, clean, flaccid and innocuous preparatory schools. He went all wrong at the start, was generally considered both conceited and arrogant, and universally detested.	leaders of society

consciousness of a governing class; we have, instead, clean, flaccid and innocuous preparatory schools.	Amory’s two years at St. Regis’, though in turn painful and triumphant, had as little real significance in his own life as the American “prep” school, crushed as it is under the heel of the universities, has to American life in general. We have no Eton to create the self-consciousness of a governing class; we have, instead, clean, flaccid and innocuous preparatory schools. He went all wrong at the start, was generally considered both conceited and arrogant, and universally detested.	a sense of entitlement; instead, we have bland, harmless prep schools.

went all wrong at the start, was generally considered both conceited and arrogant, and universally detested.	We have no Eton to create the self-consciousness of a governing class; we have, instead, clean, flaccid and innocuous preparatory schools. He went all wrong at the start, was generally considered both conceited and arrogant, and universally detested. He played football intensely, alternating a reckless brilliancy with a tendency to keep himself as safe from hazard as decency would permit.	made bad choices early on, was seen as arrogant and full of himself, and was hated by everyone.

a reckless brilliancy	He went all wrong at the start, was generally considered both conceited and arrogant, and universally detested. He played football intensely, alternating a reckless brilliancy with a tendency to keep himself as safe from hazard as decency would permit. In a wild panic he backed out of a fight with a boy his own size, to a chorus of scorn, and a week later, in desperation, picked a battle with another boy very much bigger, from which he emerged badly beaten, but rather proud of himself.	a display of talent mixed with dangerous moves

boy very much bigger, from which he emerged badly beaten, but rather proud of himself.	He played football intensely, alternating a reckless brilliancy with a tendency to keep himself as safe from hazard as decency would permit. In a wild panic he backed out of a fight with a boy his own size, to a chorus of scorn, and a week later, in desperation, picked a battle with another boy very much bigger, from which he emerged badly beaten, but rather proud of himself. He was resentful against all those in authority over him, and this, combined with a lazy indifference toward his work, exasperated every master in school.	a much bigger boy, and even though he got beat up, he felt proud.

a lazy indifference	In a wild panic he backed out of a fight with a boy his own size, to a chorus of scorn, and a week later, in desperation, picked a battle with another boy very much bigger, from which he emerged badly beaten, but rather proud of himself. He was resentful against all those in authority over him, and this, combined with a lazy indifference toward his work, exasperated every master in school. He grew discouraged and imagined himself a pariah; took to sulking in corners and reading after lights.	a lack of interest

combined with a lazy indifference toward his work, exasperated every master in school.	In a wild panic he backed out of a fight with a boy his own size, to a chorus of scorn, and a week later, in desperation, picked a battle with another boy very much bigger, from which he emerged badly beaten, but rather proud of himself. He was resentful against all those in authority over him, and this, combined with a lazy indifference toward his work, exasperated every master in school. He grew discouraged and imagined himself a pariah; took to sulking in corners and reading after lights.	His laziness and lack of interest in schoolwork frustrated all the teachers.

sulking in corners and reading after lights.	He was resentful against all those in authority over him, and this, combined with a lazy indifference toward his work, exasperated every master in school. He grew discouraged and imagined himself a pariah; took to sulking in corners and reading after lights. With a dread of being alone he attached a few friends, but since they were not among the elite of the school, he used them simply as mirrors of himself, audiences before which he might do that posing absolutely essential to him.	moping in corners and reading secretly at night.

do that posing absolutely essential to him.	He grew discouraged and imagined himself a pariah; took to sulking in corners and reading after lights. With a dread of being alone he attached a few friends, but since they were not among the elite of the school, he used them simply as mirrors of himself, audiences before which he might do that posing absolutely essential to him. He was unbearably lonely, desperately unhappy.	act in the way he felt he needed to.

was the last part to go below the surface, so he could still enjoy a comfortable glow when “Wookey-wookey,” the deaf old housekeeper, told him that he was the best-looking boy she had ever seen.	There were some few grains of comfort. Whenever Amory was submerged, his vanity was the last part to go below the surface, so he could still enjoy a comfortable glow when “Wookey-wookey,” the deaf old housekeeper, told him that he was the best-looking boy she had ever seen. It had pleased him to be the lightest and youngest man on the first football squad; it pleased him when Doctor Dougall told him at the end of a heated conference that he could, if he wished, get the best marks in school.	was the last thing to disappear, so he still felt good when the deaf old housekeeper, "Wookey-wookey," told him he was the best-looking boy she'd ever seen.

the deaf old housekeeper	There were some few grains of comfort. Whenever Amory was submerged, his vanity was the last part to go below the surface, so he could still enjoy a comfortable glow when “Wookey-wookey,” the deaf old housekeeper, told him that he was the best-looking boy she had ever seen. It had pleased him to be the lightest and youngest man on the first football squad; it pleased him when Doctor Dougall told him at the end of a heated conference that he could, if he wished, get the best marks in school.	the deaf old housekeeper

the lightest and youngest man	Whenever Amory was submerged, his vanity was the last part to go below the surface, so he could still enjoy a comfortable glow when “Wookey-wookey,” the deaf old housekeeper, told him that he was the best-looking boy she had ever seen. It had pleased him to be the lightest and youngest man on the first football squad; it pleased him when Doctor Dougall told him at the end of a heated conference that he could, if he wished, get the best marks in school. But Doctor Dougall was wrong.	the youngest and least heavy man

was Amory’s first term.	It was temperamentally impossible for Amory to get the best marks in school. Miserable, confined to bounds, unpopular with both faculty and students—that was Amory’s first term. But at Christmas he had returned to Minneapolis, tightlipped and strangely jubilant.	That's how Amory's first semester went.

Amory’s first term	It was temperamentally impossible for Amory to get the best marks in school. Miserable, confined to bounds, unpopular with both faculty and students—that was Amory’s first term. But at Christmas he had returned to Minneapolis, tightlipped and strangely jubilant.	Amory's first semester

returned to Minneapolis, tightlipped and strangely jubilant.	Miserable, confined to bounds, unpopular with both faculty and students—that was Amory’s first term. But at Christmas he had returned to Minneapolis, tightlipped and strangely jubilant. “Oh, I was sort of fresh at first,” he told Frog Parker patronizingly, “but I got along fine—lightest man on the squad.	went back to Minneapolis, silent but oddly happy.

was sort of fresh at first,” he told Frog Parker patronizingly, “but I got along fine—lightest man on the squad.	But at Christmas he had returned to Minneapolis, tightlipped and strangely jubilant. “Oh, I was sort of fresh at first,” he told Frog Parker patronizingly, “but I got along fine—lightest man on the squad. You ought to go away to school, Froggy.	I was a bit cocky at the beginning, but I did okay. I was the smallest guy on the team.

away to school, Froggy.	“Oh, I was sort of fresh at first,” he told Frog Parker patronizingly, “but I got along fine—lightest man on the squad. You ought to go away to school, Froggy. It’s great stuff.”	You should go away to school, Froggy.

hall that Amory was to come to his room at nine.	On the last night of his first term, Mr. Margotson, the senior master, sent word to study hall that Amory was to come to his room at nine. Amory suspected that advice was forthcoming, but he determined to be courteous, because this Mr. Margotson had been kindly disposed toward him.	Amory was asked to come to his room at nine.

disposed toward him.	On the last night of his first term, Mr. Margotson, the senior master, sent word to study hall that Amory was to come to his room at nine. Amory suspected that advice was forthcoming, but he determined to be courteous, because this Mr. Margotson had been kindly disposed toward him. His summoner received him gravely, and motioned him to a chair.	liked him.

this Mr. Margotson	On the last night of his first term, Mr. Margotson, the senior master, sent word to study hall that Amory was to come to his room at nine. Amory suspected that advice was forthcoming, but he determined to be courteous, because this Mr. Margotson had been kindly disposed toward him. His summoner received him gravely, and motioned him to a chair.	Mr. Margotson

delicate ground	His summoner received him gravely, and motioned him to a chair. He hemmed several times and looked consciously kind, as a man will when he knows he’s on delicate ground. “Amory,” he began.	sensitive topic

will when he knows he’s on delicate ground.	His summoner received him gravely, and motioned him to a chair. He hemmed several times and looked consciously kind, as a man will when he knows he’s on delicate ground. “Amory,” he began.	does when he knows he's dealing with a sensitive issue.

have in you the makings of a—a very good man.”	“I’ve noticed you this year and I—I like you. I think you have in you the makings of a—a very good man.” “Yes, sir,” Amory managed to articulate.	have the potential to be a very good man.

talk as if he were an admitted failure.	“Yes, sir,” Amory managed to articulate. He hated having people talk as if he were an admitted failure. “But I’ve noticed,” continued the older man blindly, “that you’re not very popular with the boys.”	talk like he'd already admitted he was a failure.

cope with them—to conform to what others expect of him.”	“Ah—I thought you might not understand exactly what it was they—ah—objected to. I’m going to tell you, because I believe—ah—that when a boy knows his difficulties he’s better able to cope with them—to conform to what others expect of him.” He a-hemmed again with delicate reticence, and continued: “They seem to think that you’re—ah—rather too fresh—” Amory could stand no more.	deal with them—to fit in with what others expect from him.

hemmed again with delicate reticence, and continued: “They seem to think that you’re—ah—rather too fresh—” Amory could stand no more.	I’m going to tell you, because I believe—ah—that when a boy knows his difficulties he’s better able to cope with them—to conform to what others expect of him.” He a-hemmed again with delicate reticence, and continued: “They seem to think that you’re—ah—rather too fresh—” Amory could stand no more. He rose from his chair, scarcely controlling his voice when he spoke.	cleared his throat again, trying not to be too direct, and continued: "They seem to think you're—ah—a little too cheeky—" Amory couldn't take it anymore.

delicate reticence	I’m going to tell you, because I believe—ah—that when a boy knows his difficulties he’s better able to cope with them—to conform to what others expect of him.” He a-hemmed again with delicate reticence, and continued: “They seem to think that you’re—ah—rather too fresh—” Amory could stand no more. He rose from his chair, scarcely controlling his voice when he spoke.	subtle hesitation

refusal to be helped.	“I’m—I’ve got to go back now—hope I’m not rude—” He left the room hurriedly. In the cool air outside, as he walked to his house, he exulted in his refusal to be helped. “That damn old fool!”	refusing help.

couched up in his room, he munched Nabiscos and finished The White Company.	“As if I didn’t know!” He decided, however, that this was a good excuse not to go back to study hall that night, so, comfortably couched up in his room, he munched Nabiscos and finished The White Company.	He relaxed in his room, ate Nabiscos, and finished reading The White Company.

a long-anticipated event	There was a bright star in February. New York burst upon him on Washington’s Birthday with the brilliance of a long-anticipated event. His glimpse of it as a vivid whiteness against a deep-blue sky had left a picture of splendor that rivalled the dream cities in the Arabian Nights; but this time he saw it by electric light, and romance gleamed from the chariot-race sign on Broadway and from the women’s eyes at the Astor, where he and young Paskert from St. Regis’ had dinner.	something that had been eagerly awaited for a long time

Washington’s Birthday	There was a bright star in February. New York burst upon him on Washington’s Birthday with the brilliance of a long-anticipated event. His glimpse of it as a vivid whiteness against a deep-blue sky had left a picture of splendor that rivalled the dream cities in the Arabian Nights; but this time he saw it by electric light, and romance gleamed from the chariot-race sign on Broadway and from the women’s eyes at the Astor, where he and young Paskert from St. Regis’ had dinner.	Washington's Birthday

burst upon him on Washington’s Birthday with the brilliance of a long-anticipated event.	There was a bright star in February. New York burst upon him on Washington’s Birthday with the brilliance of a long-anticipated event. His glimpse of it as a vivid whiteness against a deep-blue sky had left a picture of splendor that rivalled the dream cities in the Arabian Nights; but this time he saw it by electric light, and romance gleamed from the chariot-race sign on Broadway and from the women’s eyes at the Astor, where he and young Paskert from St. Regis’ had dinner.	hit him on Washington's Birthday with the excitement of something he'd been waiting for.

a vivid whiteness	New York burst upon him on Washington’s Birthday with the brilliance of a long-anticipated event. His glimpse of it as a vivid whiteness against a deep-blue sky had left a picture of splendor that rivalled the dream cities in the Arabian Nights; but this time he saw it by electric light, and romance gleamed from the chariot-race sign on Broadway and from the women’s eyes at the Astor, where he and young Paskert from St. Regis’ had dinner. When they walked down the aisle of the theatre, greeted by the nervous twanging and discord of untuned violins and the sensuous, heavy fragrance of paint and powder, he moved in a sphere of epicurean delight.	a bright white color

young Paskert	New York burst upon him on Washington’s Birthday with the brilliance of a long-anticipated event. His glimpse of it as a vivid whiteness against a deep-blue sky had left a picture of splendor that rivalled the dream cities in the Arabian Nights; but this time he saw it by electric light, and romance gleamed from the chariot-race sign on Broadway and from the women’s eyes at the Astor, where he and young Paskert from St. Regis’ had dinner. When they walked down the aisle of the theatre, greeted by the nervous twanging and discord of untuned violins and the sensuous, heavy fragrance of paint and powder, he moved in a sphere of epicurean delight.	young Paskert

picture of splendor that rivalled the dream cities in the Arabian Nights; but this time he saw it by electric light, and romance gleamed from the chariot-race sign on Broadway and from the women’s eyes at the Astor, where he and young Paskert from St. Regis’ had dinner.	New York burst upon him on Washington’s Birthday with the brilliance of a long-anticipated event. His glimpse of it as a vivid whiteness against a deep-blue sky had left a picture of splendor that rivalled the dream cities in the Arabian Nights; but this time he saw it by electric light, and romance gleamed from the chariot-race sign on Broadway and from the women’s eyes at the Astor, where he and young Paskert from St. Regis’ had dinner. When they walked down the aisle of the theatre, greeted by the nervous twanging and discord of untuned violins and the sensuous, heavy fragrance of paint and powder, he moved in a sphere of epicurean delight.	a beautiful image like a city from a fairy tale; but now he saw it lit up by electric lights, and a sense of excitement came from the Broadway sign and the women's eyes at the Astor hotel, where he and Paskert had dinner.

the chariot-race sign	New York burst upon him on Washington’s Birthday with the brilliance of a long-anticipated event. His glimpse of it as a vivid whiteness against a deep-blue sky had left a picture of splendor that rivalled the dream cities in the Arabian Nights; but this time he saw it by electric light, and romance gleamed from the chariot-race sign on Broadway and from the women’s eyes at the Astor, where he and young Paskert from St. Regis’ had dinner. When they walked down the aisle of the theatre, greeted by the nervous twanging and discord of untuned violins and the sensuous, heavy fragrance of paint and powder, he moved in a sphere of epicurean delight.	the advertisement for the chariot race

the women’s eyes	New York burst upon him on Washington’s Birthday with the brilliance of a long-anticipated event. His glimpse of it as a vivid whiteness against a deep-blue sky had left a picture of splendor that rivalled the dream cities in the Arabian Nights; but this time he saw it by electric light, and romance gleamed from the chariot-race sign on Broadway and from the women’s eyes at the Astor, where he and young Paskert from St. Regis’ had dinner. When they walked down the aisle of the theatre, greeted by the nervous twanging and discord of untuned violins and the sensuous, heavy fragrance of paint and powder, he moved in a sphere of epicurean delight.	the eyes of the women

the Arabian Nights	New York burst upon him on Washington’s Birthday with the brilliance of a long-anticipated event. His glimpse of it as a vivid whiteness against a deep-blue sky had left a picture of splendor that rivalled the dream cities in the Arabian Nights; but this time he saw it by electric light, and romance gleamed from the chariot-race sign on Broadway and from the women’s eyes at the Astor, where he and young Paskert from St. Regis’ had dinner. When they walked down the aisle of the theatre, greeted by the nervous twanging and discord of untuned violins and the sensuous, heavy fragrance of paint and powder, he moved in a sphere of epicurean delight.	the Arabian Nights

the nervous twanging	His glimpse of it as a vivid whiteness against a deep-blue sky had left a picture of splendor that rivalled the dream cities in the Arabian Nights; but this time he saw it by electric light, and romance gleamed from the chariot-race sign on Broadway and from the women’s eyes at the Astor, where he and young Paskert from St. Regis’ had dinner. When they walked down the aisle of the theatre, greeted by the nervous twanging and discord of untuned violins and the sensuous, heavy fragrance of paint and powder, he moved in a sphere of epicurean delight. Everything enchanted him.	the uneasy strumming

untuned violins	His glimpse of it as a vivid whiteness against a deep-blue sky had left a picture of splendor that rivalled the dream cities in the Arabian Nights; but this time he saw it by electric light, and romance gleamed from the chariot-race sign on Broadway and from the women’s eyes at the Astor, where he and young Paskert from St. Regis’ had dinner. When they walked down the aisle of the theatre, greeted by the nervous twanging and discord of untuned violins and the sensuous, heavy fragrance of paint and powder, he moved in a sphere of epicurean delight. Everything enchanted him.	out-of-tune violins

epicurean delight	His glimpse of it as a vivid whiteness against a deep-blue sky had left a picture of splendor that rivalled the dream cities in the Arabian Nights; but this time he saw it by electric light, and romance gleamed from the chariot-race sign on Broadway and from the women’s eyes at the Astor, where he and young Paskert from St. Regis’ had dinner. When they walked down the aisle of the theatre, greeted by the nervous twanging and discord of untuned violins and the sensuous, heavy fragrance of paint and powder, he moved in a sphere of epicurean delight. Everything enchanted him.	great pleasure

twanging and discord of untuned violins and the sensuous, heavy fragrance of paint and powder, he moved in a sphere of epicurean delight.	His glimpse of it as a vivid whiteness against a deep-blue sky had left a picture of splendor that rivalled the dream cities in the Arabian Nights; but this time he saw it by electric light, and romance gleamed from the chariot-race sign on Broadway and from the women’s eyes at the Astor, where he and young Paskert from St. Regis’ had dinner. When they walked down the aisle of the theatre, greeted by the nervous twanging and discord of untuned violins and the sensuous, heavy fragrance of paint and powder, he moved in a sphere of epicurean delight. Everything enchanted him.	the jarring, off-key sound of untuned violins and the strong, sweet smell of makeup and stage paint made him feel incredibly happy and luxurious.

the sensuous, heavy fragrance	His glimpse of it as a vivid whiteness against a deep-blue sky had left a picture of splendor that rivalled the dream cities in the Arabian Nights; but this time he saw it by electric light, and romance gleamed from the chariot-race sign on Broadway and from the women’s eyes at the Astor, where he and young Paskert from St. Regis’ had dinner. When they walked down the aisle of the theatre, greeted by the nervous twanging and discord of untuned violins and the sensuous, heavy fragrance of paint and powder, he moved in a sphere of epicurean delight. Everything enchanted him.	the strong, appealing smell

The Little Millionaire	Everything enchanted him. The play was The Little Millionaire, with George M. Cohan, and there was one stunning young brunette who made him sit with brimming eyes in the ecstasy of watching her dance. “Oh—you—wonderful girl, What a wonderful girl you are—” sang the tenor, and Amory agreed silently, but passionately.	The Little Millionaire

Millionaire, with George M. Cohan, and there was one stunning young brunette who made him sit with brimming eyes in the ecstasy of watching her dance.	Everything enchanted him. The play was The Little Millionaire, with George M. Cohan, and there was one stunning young brunette who made him sit with brimming eyes in the ecstasy of watching her dance. “Oh—you—wonderful girl, What a wonderful girl you are—” sang the tenor, and Amory agreed silently, but passionately.	Millionaire, with George M. Cohan, and he was captivated by a beautiful young brunette, so much so that he watched her dance with tears of joy in his eyes.

you—wonderful girl, What a wonderful girl you are—” sang the tenor, and Amory agreed silently, but passionately.	The play was The Little Millionaire, with George M. Cohan, and there was one stunning young brunette who made him sit with brimming eyes in the ecstasy of watching her dance. “Oh—you—wonderful girl, What a wonderful girl you are—” sang the tenor, and Amory agreed silently, but passionately. “All—your—wonderful words Thrill me through—” The violins swelled and quavered on the last notes, the girl sank to a crumpled butterfly on the stage, a great burst of clapping filled the house.	You're a wonderful girl, what a wonderful girl you are, the tenor sang, and Amory silently but passionately agreed.

a crumpled butterfly	“Oh—you—wonderful girl, What a wonderful girl you are—” sang the tenor, and Amory agreed silently, but passionately. “All—your—wonderful words Thrill me through—” The violins swelled and quavered on the last notes, the girl sank to a crumpled butterfly on the stage, a great burst of clapping filled the house. Oh, to fall in love like that, to the languorous magic melody of such a tune!	collapsed butterfly

butterfly on the stage, a great burst of clapping filled the house.	“Oh—you—wonderful girl, What a wonderful girl you are—” sang the tenor, and Amory agreed silently, but passionately. “All—your—wonderful words Thrill me through—” The violins swelled and quavered on the last notes, the girl sank to a crumpled butterfly on the stage, a great burst of clapping filled the house. Oh, to fall in love like that, to the languorous magic melody of such a tune!	...a great burst of applause filled the theater.

love like that, to the languorous magic melody of such a tune!	“All—your—wonderful words Thrill me through—” The violins swelled and quavered on the last notes, the girl sank to a crumpled butterfly on the stage, a great burst of clapping filled the house. Oh, to fall in love like that, to the languorous magic melody of such a tune! The last scene was laid on a roof-garden, and the cellos sighed to the musical moon, while light adventure and facile froth-like comedy flitted back and forth in the calcium.	Love like that, to the slow, enchanting music!

the languorous magic melody	“All—your—wonderful words Thrill me through—” The violins swelled and quavered on the last notes, the girl sank to a crumpled butterfly on the stage, a great burst of clapping filled the house. Oh, to fall in love like that, to the languorous magic melody of such a tune! The last scene was laid on a roof-garden, and the cellos sighed to the musical moon, while light adventure and facile froth-like comedy flitted back and forth in the calcium.	the slow, enchanting tune

facile froth-like comedy	Oh, to fall in love like that, to the languorous magic melody of such a tune! The last scene was laid on a roof-garden, and the cellos sighed to the musical moon, while light adventure and facile froth-like comedy flitted back and forth in the calcium. Amory was on fire to be an habitué of roof-gardens, to meet a girl who should look like that—better, that very girl; whose hair would be drenched with golden moonlight, while at his elbow sparkling wine was poured by an unintelligible waiter.	easy, lighthearted fun

laid on a roof-garden, and the cellos sighed to the musical moon, while light adventure and facile froth-like comedy flitted back and forth in the calcium.	Oh, to fall in love like that, to the languorous magic melody of such a tune! The last scene was laid on a roof-garden, and the cellos sighed to the musical moon, while light adventure and facile froth-like comedy flitted back and forth in the calcium. Amory was on fire to be an habitué of roof-gardens, to meet a girl who should look like that—better, that very girl; whose hair would be drenched with golden moonlight, while at his elbow sparkling wine was poured by an unintelligible waiter.	set on a rooftop garden, with cellos playing to the moon, as carefree adventures and silly jokes floated around in the bright light.

an unintelligible waiter	The last scene was laid on a roof-garden, and the cellos sighed to the musical moon, while light adventure and facile froth-like comedy flitted back and forth in the calcium. Amory was on fire to be an habitué of roof-gardens, to meet a girl who should look like that—better, that very girl; whose hair would be drenched with golden moonlight, while at his elbow sparkling wine was poured by an unintelligible waiter. When the curtain fell for the last time he gave such a long sigh that the people in front of him twisted around and stared and said loud enough for him to hear: “What a remarkable-looking boy!”	a waiter he couldn't understand

sparkling wine	The last scene was laid on a roof-garden, and the cellos sighed to the musical moon, while light adventure and facile froth-like comedy flitted back and forth in the calcium. Amory was on fire to be an habitué of roof-gardens, to meet a girl who should look like that—better, that very girl; whose hair would be drenched with golden moonlight, while at his elbow sparkling wine was poured by an unintelligible waiter. When the curtain fell for the last time he gave such a long sigh that the people in front of him twisted around and stared and said loud enough for him to hear: “What a remarkable-looking boy!”	bubbly wine

poured by an unintelligible waiter.	The last scene was laid on a roof-garden, and the cellos sighed to the musical moon, while light adventure and facile froth-like comedy flitted back and forth in the calcium. Amory was on fire to be an habitué of roof-gardens, to meet a girl who should look like that—better, that very girl; whose hair would be drenched with golden moonlight, while at his elbow sparkling wine was poured by an unintelligible waiter. When the curtain fell for the last time he gave such a long sigh that the people in front of him twisted around and stared and said loud enough for him to hear: “What a remarkable-looking boy!”	poured by a waiter he couldn't understand.

golden moonlight	The last scene was laid on a roof-garden, and the cellos sighed to the musical moon, while light adventure and facile froth-like comedy flitted back and forth in the calcium. Amory was on fire to be an habitué of roof-gardens, to meet a girl who should look like that—better, that very girl; whose hair would be drenched with golden moonlight, while at his elbow sparkling wine was poured by an unintelligible waiter. When the curtain fell for the last time he gave such a long sigh that the people in front of him twisted around and stared and said loud enough for him to hear: “What a remarkable-looking boy!”	golden moonlight

such a long sigh	Amory was on fire to be an habitué of roof-gardens, to meet a girl who should look like that—better, that very girl; whose hair would be drenched with golden moonlight, while at his elbow sparkling wine was poured by an unintelligible waiter. When the curtain fell for the last time he gave such a long sigh that the people in front of him twisted around and stared and said loud enough for him to hear: “What a remarkable-looking boy!” This took his mind off the play, and he wondered if he really did seem handsome to the population of New York.	a very long sigh

front of him twisted around and stared and said loud enough for him to hear: “What a remarkable-looking boy!”	Amory was on fire to be an habitué of roof-gardens, to meet a girl who should look like that—better, that very girl; whose hair would be drenched with golden moonlight, while at his elbow sparkling wine was poured by an unintelligible waiter. When the curtain fell for the last time he gave such a long sigh that the people in front of him twisted around and stared and said loud enough for him to hear: “What a remarkable-looking boy!” This took his mind off the play, and he wondered if he really did seem handsome to the population of New York.	The people in front of him turned around and stared, saying loud enough for him to hear, "What a remarkable-looking boy!"

handsome to the population of New York.	When the curtain fell for the last time he gave such a long sigh that the people in front of him twisted around and stared and said loud enough for him to hear: “What a remarkable-looking boy!” This took his mind off the play, and he wondered if he really did seem handsome to the population of New York. Paskert and he walked in silence toward their hotel.	good-looking to New Yorkers.

strain on Amory’s musings: “I’d marry that girl tonight.”	The former was the first to speak. His uncertain fifteen-year-old voice broke in in a melancholy strain on Amory’s musings: “I’d marry that girl tonight.” There was no need to ask what girl he referred to.	interrupted Amory's thoughts: "I'd marry that girl tonight."

His uncertain fifteen-year-old voice	The former was the first to speak. His uncertain fifteen-year-old voice broke in in a melancholy strain on Amory’s musings: “I’d marry that girl tonight.” There was no need to ask what girl he referred to.	His shaky fifteen-year-old voice

Amory’s musings	The former was the first to speak. His uncertain fifteen-year-old voice broke in in a melancholy strain on Amory’s musings: “I’d marry that girl tonight.” There was no need to ask what girl he referred to.	Amory's thoughts

a melancholy strain	The former was the first to speak. His uncertain fifteen-year-old voice broke in in a melancholy strain on Amory’s musings: “I’d marry that girl tonight.” There was no need to ask what girl he referred to.	a sad tone

need to ask what girl he referred to.	His uncertain fifteen-year-old voice broke in in a melancholy strain on Amory’s musings: “I’d marry that girl tonight.” There was no need to ask what girl he referred to. “I’d be proud to take her home and introduce her to my people,” continued Paskert.	no need to ask which girl he meant.

introduce her to my people,” continued Paskert.	There was no need to ask what girl he referred to. “I’d be proud to take her home and introduce her to my people,” continued Paskert. Amory was distinctly impressed.	introduce her to my family," continued Paskert.

said it instead of Paskert.	Amory was distinctly impressed. He wished he had said it instead of Paskert. It sounded so mature.	said it instead of Paskert.

a darn sight	“I wonder about actresses; are they all pretty bad?” “No, sir, not by a darn sight,” said the worldly youth with emphasis, “and I know that girl’s as good as gold. I can tell.”	Not at all.

youth with emphasis, “and I know that girl’s as good as gold.	“I wonder about actresses; are they all pretty bad?” “No, sir, not by a darn sight,” said the worldly youth with emphasis, “and I know that girl’s as good as gold. I can tell.”	youth emphatically, "and I know that girl is a genuinely good person."

the worldly youth	“I wonder about actresses; are they all pretty bad?” “No, sir, not by a darn sight,” said the worldly youth with emphasis, “and I know that girl’s as good as gold. I can tell.”	the experienced young man

mixing in the Broadway crowd, dreaming on the music that eddied out of the cafés.	I can tell.” They wandered on, mixing in the Broadway crowd, dreaming on the music that eddied out of the cafés. New faces flashed on and off like myriad lights, pale or rouged faces, tired, yet sustained by a weary excitement.	joining the Broadway crowd and getting lost in the music drifting from the cafes.

a weary excitement	They wandered on, mixing in the Broadway crowd, dreaming on the music that eddied out of the cafés. New faces flashed on and off like myriad lights, pale or rouged faces, tired, yet sustained by a weary excitement. Amory watched them in fascination.	tired but still excited

flashed on and off like myriad lights, pale or rouged faces, tired, yet sustained by a weary excitement.	They wandered on, mixing in the Broadway crowd, dreaming on the music that eddied out of the cafés. New faces flashed on and off like myriad lights, pale or rouged faces, tired, yet sustained by a weary excitement. Amory watched them in fascination.	appeared and disappeared like countless lights, faces pale or made-up, tired but kept going by a worn-out excitement.

myriad lights	They wandered on, mixing in the Broadway crowd, dreaming on the music that eddied out of the cafés. New faces flashed on and off like myriad lights, pale or rouged faces, tired, yet sustained by a weary excitement. Amory watched them in fascination.	countless lights

watched them in fascination.	New faces flashed on and off like myriad lights, pale or rouged faces, tired, yet sustained by a weary excitement. Amory watched them in fascination. He was planning his life.	watched them, fascinated.

the dull hours	He was planning his life. He was going to live in New York, and be known at every restaurant and café, wearing a dress-suit from early evening to early morning, sleeping away the dull hours of the forenoon. “Yes, sir, I’d marry that girl tonight!”	the boring hours

known at every restaurant and café, wearing a dress-suit from early evening to early morning, sleeping away the dull hours of the forenoon.	He was planning his life. He was going to live in New York, and be known at every restaurant and café, wearing a dress-suit from early evening to early morning, sleeping away the dull hours of the forenoon. “Yes, sir, I’d marry that girl tonight!”	famous at all the restaurants and cafes, wearing a suit from evening until morning, and sleeping through the boring hours of the morning.

October of his second and last year at St. Regis’ was a high point in Amory’s memory.	October of his second and last year at St. Regis’ was a high point in Amory’s memory. The game with Groton was played from three of a snappy, exhilarating afternoon far into the crisp autumnal twilight, and Amory at quarterback, exhorting in wild despair, making impossible tackles, calling signals in a voice that had diminished to a hoarse, furious whisper, yet found time to revel in the bloodstained bandage around his head, and the straining, glorious heroism of plunging, crashing bodies and aching limbs.	October of his last year at St. Regis' was a great memory for Amory.

Amory’s memory	October of his second and last year at St. Regis’ was a high point in Amory’s memory. The game with Groton was played from three of a snappy, exhilarating afternoon far into the crisp autumnal twilight, and Amory at quarterback, exhorting in wild despair, making impossible tackles, calling signals in a voice that had diminished to a hoarse, furious whisper, yet found time to revel in the bloodstained bandage around his head, and the straining, glorious heroism of plunging, crashing bodies and aching limbs.	Amory remembered

his second and last year	October of his second and last year at St. Regis’ was a high point in Amory’s memory. The game with Groton was played from three of a snappy, exhilarating afternoon far into the crisp autumnal twilight, and Amory at quarterback, exhorting in wild despair, making impossible tackles, calling signals in a voice that had diminished to a hoarse, furious whisper, yet found time to revel in the bloodstained bandage around his head, and the straining, glorious heroism of plunging, crashing bodies and aching limbs.	his final year

heroism of plunging, crashing bodies and aching limbs.	October of his second and last year at St. Regis’ was a high point in Amory’s memory. The game with Groton was played from three of a snappy, exhilarating afternoon far into the crisp autumnal twilight, and Amory at quarterback, exhorting in wild despair, making impossible tackles, calling signals in a voice that had diminished to a hoarse, furious whisper, yet found time to revel in the bloodstained bandage around his head, and the straining, glorious heroism of plunging, crashing bodies and aching limbs. For those minutes courage flowed like wine out of the November dusk, and he was the eternal hero, one with the sea-rover on the prow of a Norse galley, one with Roland and Horatius, Sir Nigel and Ted Coy, scraped and stripped into trim and then flung by his own will into the breach, beating back the tide, hearing from afar the thunder of cheers.	heroism of bodies smashing together and limbs aching.

the straining, glorious heroism	October of his second and last year at St. Regis’ was a high point in Amory’s memory. The game with Groton was played from three of a snappy, exhilarating afternoon far into the crisp autumnal twilight, and Amory at quarterback, exhorting in wild despair, making impossible tackles, calling signals in a voice that had diminished to a hoarse, furious whisper, yet found time to revel in the bloodstained bandage around his head, and the straining, glorious heroism of plunging, crashing bodies and aching limbs. For those minutes courage flowed like wine out of the November dusk, and he was the eternal hero, one with the sea-rover on the prow of a Norse galley, one with Roland and Horatius, Sir Nigel and Ted Coy, scraped and stripped into trim and then flung by his own will into the breach, beating back the tide, hearing from afar the thunder of cheers.	the glorious and exhausting heroism

wild despair	October of his second and last year at St. Regis’ was a high point in Amory’s memory. The game with Groton was played from three of a snappy, exhilarating afternoon far into the crisp autumnal twilight, and Amory at quarterback, exhorting in wild despair, making impossible tackles, calling signals in a voice that had diminished to a hoarse, furious whisper, yet found time to revel in the bloodstained bandage around his head, and the straining, glorious heroism of plunging, crashing bodies and aching limbs. For those minutes courage flowed like wine out of the November dusk, and he was the eternal hero, one with the sea-rover on the prow of a Norse galley, one with Roland and Horatius, Sir Nigel and Ted Coy, scraped and stripped into trim and then flung by his own will into the breach, beating back the tide, hearing from afar the thunder of cheers.	frantic desperation

a hoarse, furious whisper	October of his second and last year at St. Regis’ was a high point in Amory’s memory. The game with Groton was played from three of a snappy, exhilarating afternoon far into the crisp autumnal twilight, and Amory at quarterback, exhorting in wild despair, making impossible tackles, calling signals in a voice that had diminished to a hoarse, furious whisper, yet found time to revel in the bloodstained bandage around his head, and the straining, glorious heroism of plunging, crashing bodies and aching limbs. For those minutes courage flowed like wine out of the November dusk, and he was the eternal hero, one with the sea-rover on the prow of a Norse galley, one with Roland and Horatius, Sir Nigel and Ted Coy, scraped and stripped into trim and then flung by his own will into the breach, beating back the tide, hearing from afar the thunder of cheers.	a raspy, angry whisper

the bloodstained bandage	October of his second and last year at St. Regis’ was a high point in Amory’s memory. The game with Groton was played from three of a snappy, exhilarating afternoon far into the crisp autumnal twilight, and Amory at quarterback, exhorting in wild despair, making impossible tackles, calling signals in a voice that had diminished to a hoarse, furious whisper, yet found time to revel in the bloodstained bandage around his head, and the straining, glorious heroism of plunging, crashing bodies and aching limbs. For those minutes courage flowed like wine out of the November dusk, and he was the eternal hero, one with the sea-rover on the prow of a Norse galley, one with Roland and Horatius, Sir Nigel and Ted Coy, scraped and stripped into trim and then flung by his own will into the breach, beating back the tide, hearing from afar the thunder of cheers.	the bandage stained with blood

a snappy, exhilarating afternoon	October of his second and last year at St. Regis’ was a high point in Amory’s memory. The game with Groton was played from three of a snappy, exhilarating afternoon far into the crisp autumnal twilight, and Amory at quarterback, exhorting in wild despair, making impossible tackles, calling signals in a voice that had diminished to a hoarse, furious whisper, yet found time to revel in the bloodstained bandage around his head, and the straining, glorious heroism of plunging, crashing bodies and aching limbs. For those minutes courage flowed like wine out of the November dusk, and he was the eternal hero, one with the sea-rover on the prow of a Norse galley, one with Roland and Horatius, Sir Nigel and Ted Coy, scraped and stripped into trim and then flung by his own will into the breach, beating back the tide, hearing from afar the thunder of cheers.	a brisk, exciting afternoon

aching limbs	October of his second and last year at St. Regis’ was a high point in Amory’s memory. The game with Groton was played from three of a snappy, exhilarating afternoon far into the crisp autumnal twilight, and Amory at quarterback, exhorting in wild despair, making impossible tackles, calling signals in a voice that had diminished to a hoarse, furious whisper, yet found time to revel in the bloodstained bandage around his head, and the straining, glorious heroism of plunging, crashing bodies and aching limbs. For those minutes courage flowed like wine out of the November dusk, and he was the eternal hero, one with the sea-rover on the prow of a Norse galley, one with Roland and Horatius, Sir Nigel and Ted Coy, scraped and stripped into trim and then flung by his own will into the breach, beating back the tide, hearing from afar the thunder of cheers.	sore limbs

the crisp autumnal twilight	October of his second and last year at St. Regis’ was a high point in Amory’s memory. The game with Groton was played from three of a snappy, exhilarating afternoon far into the crisp autumnal twilight, and Amory at quarterback, exhorting in wild despair, making impossible tackles, calling signals in a voice that had diminished to a hoarse, furious whisper, yet found time to revel in the bloodstained bandage around his head, and the straining, glorious heroism of plunging, crashing bodies and aching limbs. For those minutes courage flowed like wine out of the November dusk, and he was the eternal hero, one with the sea-rover on the prow of a Norse galley, one with Roland and Horatius, Sir Nigel and Ted Coy, scraped and stripped into trim and then flung by his own will into the breach, beating back the tide, hearing from afar the thunder of cheers.	the cool, autumn evening

one with Roland and Horatius, Sir Nigel and Ted Coy, scraped and stripped into trim and then flung by his own will into the breach, beating back the tide, hearing from afar the thunder of cheers.	The game with Groton was played from three of a snappy, exhilarating afternoon far into the crisp autumnal twilight, and Amory at quarterback, exhorting in wild despair, making impossible tackles, calling signals in a voice that had diminished to a hoarse, furious whisper, yet found time to revel in the bloodstained bandage around his head, and the straining, glorious heroism of plunging, crashing bodies and aching limbs. For those minutes courage flowed like wine out of the November dusk, and he was the eternal hero, one with the sea-rover on the prow of a Norse galley, one with Roland and Horatius, Sir Nigel and Ted Coy, scraped and stripped into trim and then flung by his own will into the breach, beating back the tide, hearing from afar the thunder of cheers. finally bruised and weary, but still elusive, circling an end, twisting, changing pace, straight-arming.	like Roland, Horatius, Sir Nigel, and Ted Coy, prepared for action and willingly thrown into the fight, pushing back the enemy and hearing distant cheers.

a Norse galley	The game with Groton was played from three of a snappy, exhilarating afternoon far into the crisp autumnal twilight, and Amory at quarterback, exhorting in wild despair, making impossible tackles, calling signals in a voice that had diminished to a hoarse, furious whisper, yet found time to revel in the bloodstained bandage around his head, and the straining, glorious heroism of plunging, crashing bodies and aching limbs. For those minutes courage flowed like wine out of the November dusk, and he was the eternal hero, one with the sea-rover on the prow of a Norse galley, one with Roland and Horatius, Sir Nigel and Ted Coy, scraped and stripped into trim and then flung by his own will into the breach, beating back the tide, hearing from afar the thunder of cheers. finally bruised and weary, but still elusive, circling an end, twisting, changing pace, straight-arming.	a Viking ship

the November dusk	The game with Groton was played from three of a snappy, exhilarating afternoon far into the crisp autumnal twilight, and Amory at quarterback, exhorting in wild despair, making impossible tackles, calling signals in a voice that had diminished to a hoarse, furious whisper, yet found time to revel in the bloodstained bandage around his head, and the straining, glorious heroism of plunging, crashing bodies and aching limbs. For those minutes courage flowed like wine out of the November dusk, and he was the eternal hero, one with the sea-rover on the prow of a Norse galley, one with Roland and Horatius, Sir Nigel and Ted Coy, scraped and stripped into trim and then flung by his own will into the breach, beating back the tide, hearing from afar the thunder of cheers. finally bruised and weary, but still elusive, circling an end, twisting, changing pace, straight-arming.	the fading light of a November evening

bruised and weary, but still elusive, circling an end, twisting, changing pace, straight-arming.	For those minutes courage flowed like wine out of the November dusk, and he was the eternal hero, one with the sea-rover on the prow of a Norse galley, one with Roland and Horatius, Sir Nigel and Ted Coy, scraped and stripped into trim and then flung by his own will into the breach, beating back the tide, hearing from afar the thunder of cheers. finally bruised and weary, but still elusive, circling an end, twisting, changing pace, straight-arming. falling behind the Groton goal with two men on his legs, in the only touchdown of the game.	Hurt and tired, but still hard to catch, running around the end of the line, twisting his body, changing how fast he was going, and pushing defenders away with his arm.

touchdown of the game.	finally bruised and weary, but still elusive, circling an end, twisting, changing pace, straight-arming. falling behind the Groton goal with two men on his legs, in the only touchdown of the game.	Touchdown of the game.

the only touchdown	finally bruised and weary, but still elusive, circling an end, twisting, changing pace, straight-arming. falling behind the Groton goal with two men on his legs, in the only touchdown of the game.	the only touchdown

the Groton goal	finally bruised and weary, but still elusive, circling an end, twisting, changing pace, straight-arming. falling behind the Groton goal with two men on his legs, in the only touchdown of the game.	Groton's goal line

the scoffing superiority	From the scoffing superiority of sixth-form year and success Amory looked back with cynical wonder on his status of the year before. He was changed as completely as Amory Blaine could ever be changed.	mocking arrogance

superiority of sixth-form year and success Amory looked back with cynical wonder on his status of the year before.	From the scoffing superiority of sixth-form year and success Amory looked back with cynical wonder on his status of the year before. He was changed as completely as Amory Blaine could ever be changed.	Having achieved success and reached his final year, Amory looked back at his previous year with cynical amazement.

cynical wonder	From the scoffing superiority of sixth-form year and success Amory looked back with cynical wonder on his status of the year before. He was changed as completely as Amory Blaine could ever be changed.	cynical amazement

completely as Amory Blaine could ever be changed.	From the scoffing superiority of sixth-form year and success Amory looked back with cynical wonder on his status of the year before. He was changed as completely as Amory Blaine could ever be changed. Amory plus Beatrice plus two years in Minneapolis—these had been his ingredients when he entered St. Regis’.	as much as Amory Blaine could ever change.

years in Minneapolis—these had been his ingredients when he entered St. Regis’.	He was changed as completely as Amory Blaine could ever be changed. Amory plus Beatrice plus two years in Minneapolis—these had been his ingredients when he entered St. Regis’. But the Minneapolis years were not a thick enough overlay to conceal the “Amory plus Beatrice” from the ferreting eyes of a boarding-school, so St. Regis’ had very painfully drilled Beatrice out of him, and begun to lay down new and more conventional planking on the fundamental Amory.	experiences in Minneapolis had shaped him when he arrived at St. Regis.

lay down new and more conventional planking on the fundamental Amory.	Amory plus Beatrice plus two years in Minneapolis—these had been his ingredients when he entered St. Regis’. But the Minneapolis years were not a thick enough overlay to conceal the “Amory plus Beatrice” from the ferreting eyes of a boarding-school, so St. Regis’ had very painfully drilled Beatrice out of him, and begun to lay down new and more conventional planking on the fundamental Amory. But both St. Regis’ and Amory were unconscious of the fact that this fundamental Amory had not in himself changed.	started making Amory more normal and like everyone else.

the fundamental Amory	Amory plus Beatrice plus two years in Minneapolis—these had been his ingredients when he entered St. Regis’. But the Minneapolis years were not a thick enough overlay to conceal the “Amory plus Beatrice” from the ferreting eyes of a boarding-school, so St. Regis’ had very painfully drilled Beatrice out of him, and begun to lay down new and more conventional planking on the fundamental Amory. But both St. Regis’ and Amory were unconscious of the fact that this fundamental Amory had not in himself changed.	the core Amory

the “Amory plus Beatrice	Amory plus Beatrice plus two years in Minneapolis—these had been his ingredients when he entered St. Regis’. But the Minneapolis years were not a thick enough overlay to conceal the “Amory plus Beatrice” from the ferreting eyes of a boarding-school, so St. Regis’ had very painfully drilled Beatrice out of him, and begun to lay down new and more conventional planking on the fundamental Amory. But both St. Regis’ and Amory were unconscious of the fact that this fundamental Amory had not in himself changed.	Amory's relationship with Beatrice

new and more conventional planking	Amory plus Beatrice plus two years in Minneapolis—these had been his ingredients when he entered St. Regis’. But the Minneapolis years were not a thick enough overlay to conceal the “Amory plus Beatrice” from the ferreting eyes of a boarding-school, so St. Regis’ had very painfully drilled Beatrice out of him, and begun to lay down new and more conventional planking on the fundamental Amory. But both St. Regis’ and Amory were unconscious of the fact that this fundamental Amory had not in himself changed.	new and more typical behaviors

the ferreting eyes	Amory plus Beatrice plus two years in Minneapolis—these had been his ingredients when he entered St. Regis’. But the Minneapolis years were not a thick enough overlay to conceal the “Amory plus Beatrice” from the ferreting eyes of a boarding-school, so St. Regis’ had very painfully drilled Beatrice out of him, and begun to lay down new and more conventional planking on the fundamental Amory. But both St. Regis’ and Amory were unconscious of the fact that this fundamental Amory had not in himself changed.	the watchful eyes

a boarding-school	Amory plus Beatrice plus two years in Minneapolis—these had been his ingredients when he entered St. Regis’. But the Minneapolis years were not a thick enough overlay to conceal the “Amory plus Beatrice” from the ferreting eyes of a boarding-school, so St. Regis’ had very painfully drilled Beatrice out of him, and begun to lay down new and more conventional planking on the fundamental Amory. But both St. Regis’ and Amory were unconscious of the fact that this fundamental Amory had not in himself changed.	a school where students live

a thick enough overlay	Amory plus Beatrice plus two years in Minneapolis—these had been his ingredients when he entered St. Regis’. But the Minneapolis years were not a thick enough overlay to conceal the “Amory plus Beatrice” from the ferreting eyes of a boarding-school, so St. Regis’ had very painfully drilled Beatrice out of him, and begun to lay down new and more conventional planking on the fundamental Amory. But both St. Regis’ and Amory were unconscious of the fact that this fundamental Amory had not in himself changed.	enough to hide

this fundamental Amory	But the Minneapolis years were not a thick enough overlay to conceal the “Amory plus Beatrice” from the ferreting eyes of a boarding-school, so St. Regis’ had very painfully drilled Beatrice out of him, and begun to lay down new and more conventional planking on the fundamental Amory. But both St. Regis’ and Amory were unconscious of the fact that this fundamental Amory had not in himself changed. Those qualities for which he had suffered, his moodiness, his tendency to pose, his laziness, and his love of playing the fool, were now taken as a matter of course, recognized eccentricities in a star quarterback, a clever actor, and the editor of the St. Regis Tattler: it puzzled him to see impressionable small boys imitating the very vanities that had not long ago been contemptible weaknesses.	Amory's core personality

fact that this fundamental Amory had not in himself changed.	But the Minneapolis years were not a thick enough overlay to conceal the “Amory plus Beatrice” from the ferreting eyes of a boarding-school, so St. Regis’ had very painfully drilled Beatrice out of him, and begun to lay down new and more conventional planking on the fundamental Amory. But both St. Regis’ and Amory were unconscious of the fact that this fundamental Amory had not in himself changed. Those qualities for which he had suffered, his moodiness, his tendency to pose, his laziness, and his love of playing the fool, were now taken as a matter of course, recognized eccentricities in a star quarterback, a clever actor, and the editor of the St. Regis Tattler: it puzzled him to see impressionable small boys imitating the very vanities that had not long ago been contemptible weaknesses.	that the core of Amory hadn't changed.

both St. Regis	But the Minneapolis years were not a thick enough overlay to conceal the “Amory plus Beatrice” from the ferreting eyes of a boarding-school, so St. Regis’ had very painfully drilled Beatrice out of him, and begun to lay down new and more conventional planking on the fundamental Amory. But both St. Regis’ and Amory were unconscious of the fact that this fundamental Amory had not in himself changed. Those qualities for which he had suffered, his moodiness, his tendency to pose, his laziness, and his love of playing the fool, were now taken as a matter of course, recognized eccentricities in a star quarterback, a clever actor, and the editor of the St. Regis Tattler: it puzzled him to see impressionable small boys imitating the very vanities that had not long ago been contemptible weaknesses.	Both the school

contemptible weaknesses	But both St. Regis’ and Amory were unconscious of the fact that this fundamental Amory had not in himself changed. Those qualities for which he had suffered, his moodiness, his tendency to pose, his laziness, and his love of playing the fool, were now taken as a matter of course, recognized eccentricities in a star quarterback, a clever actor, and the editor of the St. Regis Tattler: it puzzled him to see impressionable small boys imitating the very vanities that had not long ago been contemptible weaknesses. After the football season he slumped into dreamy content.	shameful flaws

a star quarterback	But both St. Regis’ and Amory were unconscious of the fact that this fundamental Amory had not in himself changed. Those qualities for which he had suffered, his moodiness, his tendency to pose, his laziness, and his love of playing the fool, were now taken as a matter of course, recognized eccentricities in a star quarterback, a clever actor, and the editor of the St. Regis Tattler: it puzzled him to see impressionable small boys imitating the very vanities that had not long ago been contemptible weaknesses. After the football season he slumped into dreamy content.	a star quarterback

impressionable small boys	But both St. Regis’ and Amory were unconscious of the fact that this fundamental Amory had not in himself changed. Those qualities for which he had suffered, his moodiness, his tendency to pose, his laziness, and his love of playing the fool, were now taken as a matter of course, recognized eccentricities in a star quarterback, a clever actor, and the editor of the St. Regis Tattler: it puzzled him to see impressionable small boys imitating the very vanities that had not long ago been contemptible weaknesses. After the football season he slumped into dreamy content.	easily influenced young boys

the St. Regis Tattler	But both St. Regis’ and Amory were unconscious of the fact that this fundamental Amory had not in himself changed. Those qualities for which he had suffered, his moodiness, his tendency to pose, his laziness, and his love of playing the fool, were now taken as a matter of course, recognized eccentricities in a star quarterback, a clever actor, and the editor of the St. Regis Tattler: it puzzled him to see impressionable small boys imitating the very vanities that had not long ago been contemptible weaknesses. After the football season he slumped into dreamy content.	The St. Regis newspaper

a clever actor	But both St. Regis’ and Amory were unconscious of the fact that this fundamental Amory had not in himself changed. Those qualities for which he had suffered, his moodiness, his tendency to pose, his laziness, and his love of playing the fool, were now taken as a matter of course, recognized eccentricities in a star quarterback, a clever actor, and the editor of the St. Regis Tattler: it puzzled him to see impressionable small boys imitating the very vanities that had not long ago been contemptible weaknesses. After the football season he slumped into dreamy content.	a good actor

the very vanities	But both St. Regis’ and Amory were unconscious of the fact that this fundamental Amory had not in himself changed. Those qualities for which he had suffered, his moodiness, his tendency to pose, his laziness, and his love of playing the fool, were now taken as a matter of course, recognized eccentricities in a star quarterback, a clever actor, and the editor of the St. Regis Tattler: it puzzled him to see impressionable small boys imitating the very vanities that had not long ago been contemptible weaknesses. After the football season he slumped into dreamy content.	the same conceited behaviors

tendency to pose, his laziness, and his love of playing the fool, were now taken as a matter of course, recognized eccentricities in a star quarterback, a clever actor, and the editor of the St. Regis Tattler: it puzzled him to see impressionable small boys imitating the very vanities that had not long ago been contemptible weaknesses.	But both St. Regis’ and Amory were unconscious of the fact that this fundamental Amory had not in himself changed. Those qualities for which he had suffered, his moodiness, his tendency to pose, his laziness, and his love of playing the fool, were now taken as a matter of course, recognized eccentricities in a star quarterback, a clever actor, and the editor of the St. Regis Tattler: it puzzled him to see impressionable small boys imitating the very vanities that had not long ago been contemptible weaknesses. After the football season he slumped into dreamy content.	His posing, laziness, and love of goofing around were now seen as normal, just quirks of a star quarterback, good actor, and school newspaper editor. He was confused to see younger kids copying the very things that used to be seen as pathetic flaws.

slumped into dreamy content.	Those qualities for which he had suffered, his moodiness, his tendency to pose, his laziness, and his love of playing the fool, were now taken as a matter of course, recognized eccentricities in a star quarterback, a clever actor, and the editor of the St. Regis Tattler: it puzzled him to see impressionable small boys imitating the very vanities that had not long ago been contemptible weaknesses. After the football season he slumped into dreamy content. The night of the pre-holiday dance he slipped away and went early to bed for the pleasure of hearing the violin music cross the grass and come surging in at his window.	became dreamily content.

dreamy content	Those qualities for which he had suffered, his moodiness, his tendency to pose, his laziness, and his love of playing the fool, were now taken as a matter of course, recognized eccentricities in a star quarterback, a clever actor, and the editor of the St. Regis Tattler: it puzzled him to see impressionable small boys imitating the very vanities that had not long ago been contemptible weaknesses. After the football season he slumped into dreamy content. The night of the pre-holiday dance he slipped away and went early to bed for the pleasure of hearing the violin music cross the grass and come surging in at his window.	peaceful happiness

pleasure of hearing the violin music cross the grass and come surging in at his window.	After the football season he slumped into dreamy content. The night of the pre-holiday dance he slipped away and went early to bed for the pleasure of hearing the violin music cross the grass and come surging in at his window. Many nights he lay there dreaming awake of secret cafés in Mont Martre, where ivory women delved in romantic mysteries with diplomats and soldiers of fortune, while orchestras played Hungarian waltzes and the air was thick and exotic with intrigue and moonlight and adventure.	enjoying the sound of the violin music traveling across the lawn and flooding into his room.

exotic with intrigue and moonlight and adventure.	The night of the pre-holiday dance he slipped away and went early to bed for the pleasure of hearing the violin music cross the grass and come surging in at his window. Many nights he lay there dreaming awake of secret cafés in Mont Martre, where ivory women delved in romantic mysteries with diplomats and soldiers of fortune, while orchestras played Hungarian waltzes and the air was thick and exotic with intrigue and moonlight and adventure. In the spring he read L’Allegro, by request, and was inspired to lyrical outpourings on the subject of Arcady and the pipes of Pan.	filled with mystery, romance, and excitement.

Hungarian waltzes	The night of the pre-holiday dance he slipped away and went early to bed for the pleasure of hearing the violin music cross the grass and come surging in at his window. Many nights he lay there dreaming awake of secret cafés in Mont Martre, where ivory women delved in romantic mysteries with diplomats and soldiers of fortune, while orchestras played Hungarian waltzes and the air was thick and exotic with intrigue and moonlight and adventure. In the spring he read L’Allegro, by request, and was inspired to lyrical outpourings on the subject of Arcady and the pipes of Pan.	Hungarian waltzes

secret cafés	The night of the pre-holiday dance he slipped away and went early to bed for the pleasure of hearing the violin music cross the grass and come surging in at his window. Many nights he lay there dreaming awake of secret cafés in Mont Martre, where ivory women delved in romantic mysteries with diplomats and soldiers of fortune, while orchestras played Hungarian waltzes and the air was thick and exotic with intrigue and moonlight and adventure. In the spring he read L’Allegro, by request, and was inspired to lyrical outpourings on the subject of Arcady and the pipes of Pan.	hidden cafes

lyrical outpourings	Many nights he lay there dreaming awake of secret cafés in Mont Martre, where ivory women delved in romantic mysteries with diplomats and soldiers of fortune, while orchestras played Hungarian waltzes and the air was thick and exotic with intrigue and moonlight and adventure. In the spring he read L’Allegro, by request, and was inspired to lyrical outpourings on the subject of Arcady and the pipes of Pan. He moved his bed so that the sun would wake him at dawn that he might dress and go out to the archaic swing that hung from an apple-tree near the sixth-form house.	passionate poems

the archaic swing	In the spring he read L’Allegro, by request, and was inspired to lyrical outpourings on the subject of Arcady and the pipes of Pan. He moved his bed so that the sun would wake him at dawn that he might dress and go out to the archaic swing that hung from an apple-tree near the sixth-form house. Seating himself in this he would pump higher and higher until he got the effect of swinging into the wide air, into a fairyland of piping satyrs and nymphs with the faces of fair-haired girls he passed in the streets of Eastchester.	the old swing

moved his bed so that the sun would wake him at dawn that he might dress and go out to the archaic swing that hung from an apple-tree near the sixth-form house.	In the spring he read L’Allegro, by request, and was inspired to lyrical outpourings on the subject of Arcady and the pipes of Pan. He moved his bed so that the sun would wake him at dawn that he might dress and go out to the archaic swing that hung from an apple-tree near the sixth-form house. Seating himself in this he would pump higher and higher until he got the effect of swinging into the wide air, into a fairyland of piping satyrs and nymphs with the faces of fair-haired girls he passed in the streets of Eastchester.	He moved his bed so the sun would wake him up early, so he could get dressed and go to the old swing hanging from an apple tree near the senior's dorm.

effect of swinging into the wide air, into a fairyland of piping satyrs and nymphs with the faces of fair-haired girls he passed in the streets of Eastchester.	He moved his bed so that the sun would wake him at dawn that he might dress and go out to the archaic swing that hung from an apple-tree near the sixth-form house. Seating himself in this he would pump higher and higher until he got the effect of swinging into the wide air, into a fairyland of piping satyrs and nymphs with the faces of fair-haired girls he passed in the streets of Eastchester. As the swing reached its highest point, Arcady really lay just over the brow of a certain hill, where the brown road dwindled out of sight in a golden dot.	the feeling of swinging into the open air, into a fantasy world of flute-playing mythical creatures and nymphs who looked like the blond girls he saw in Eastchester.

piping satyrs	He moved his bed so that the sun would wake him at dawn that he might dress and go out to the archaic swing that hung from an apple-tree near the sixth-form house. Seating himself in this he would pump higher and higher until he got the effect of swinging into the wide air, into a fairyland of piping satyrs and nymphs with the faces of fair-haired girls he passed in the streets of Eastchester. As the swing reached its highest point, Arcady really lay just over the brow of a certain hill, where the brown road dwindled out of sight in a golden dot.	Satyrs playing pipes

fair-haired girls	He moved his bed so that the sun would wake him at dawn that he might dress and go out to the archaic swing that hung from an apple-tree near the sixth-form house. Seating himself in this he would pump higher and higher until he got the effect of swinging into the wide air, into a fairyland of piping satyrs and nymphs with the faces of fair-haired girls he passed in the streets of Eastchester. As the swing reached its highest point, Arcady really lay just over the brow of a certain hill, where the brown road dwindled out of sight in a golden dot.	blond girls

dwindled out of sight in a golden dot.	Seating himself in this he would pump higher and higher until he got the effect of swinging into the wide air, into a fairyland of piping satyrs and nymphs with the faces of fair-haired girls he passed in the streets of Eastchester. As the swing reached its highest point, Arcady really lay just over the brow of a certain hill, where the brown road dwindled out of sight in a golden dot. He read voluminously all spring, the beginning of his eighteenth year: The Gentleman from Indiana, The New Arabian Nights, The Morals of Marcus Ordeyne, The Man Who Was Thursday, which he liked without understanding; Stover at Yale, that became somewhat of a textbook; Dombey and Son, because he thought he really should read better stuff; Robert Chambers, David Graham Phillips, and E. Phillips Oppenheim complete, and a scattering of Tennyson and Kipling.	disappeared as a tiny, golden speck.

his eighteenth year	As the swing reached its highest point, Arcady really lay just over the brow of a certain hill, where the brown road dwindled out of sight in a golden dot. He read voluminously all spring, the beginning of his eighteenth year: The Gentleman from Indiana, The New Arabian Nights, The Morals of Marcus Ordeyne, The Man Who Was Thursday, which he liked without understanding; Stover at Yale, that became somewhat of a textbook; Dombey and Son, because he thought he really should read better stuff; Robert Chambers, David Graham Phillips, and E. Phillips Oppenheim complete, and a scattering of Tennyson and Kipling. Of all his class work only L’Allegro and some quality of rigid clarity in solid geometry stirred his languid interest.	when he was eighteen

beginning of his eighteenth year: The Gentleman from Indiana, The New Arabian Nights, The Morals of Marcus Ordeyne, The Man Who Was Thursday, which he liked without understanding; Stover at Yale, that became somewhat of a textbook; Dombey and Son, because he thought he really should read better stuff; Robert Chambers, David Graham Phillips, and E. Phillips Oppenheim complete, and a scattering of Tennyson and Kipling.	As the swing reached its highest point, Arcady really lay just over the brow of a certain hill, where the brown road dwindled out of sight in a golden dot. He read voluminously all spring, the beginning of his eighteenth year: The Gentleman from Indiana, The New Arabian Nights, The Morals of Marcus Ordeyne, The Man Who Was Thursday, which he liked without understanding; Stover at Yale, that became somewhat of a textbook; Dombey and Son, because he thought he really should read better stuff; Robert Chambers, David Graham Phillips, and E. Phillips Oppenheim complete, and a scattering of Tennyson and Kipling. Of all his class work only L’Allegro and some quality of rigid clarity in solid geometry stirred his languid interest.	During his eighteenth year, he read: The Gentleman from Indiana, The New Arabian Nights, The Morals of Marcus Ordeyne, The Man Who Was Thursday (which he enjoyed even though he didn't fully grasp it), Stover at Yale (which he treated like a textbook), Dombey and Son (because he felt he should read more serious literature), all of Robert Chambers, David Graham Phillips, and E. Phillips Oppenheim, and some poems by Tennyson and Kipling.

The New Arabian Nights	As the swing reached its highest point, Arcady really lay just over the brow of a certain hill, where the brown road dwindled out of sight in a golden dot. He read voluminously all spring, the beginning of his eighteenth year: The Gentleman from Indiana, The New Arabian Nights, The Morals of Marcus Ordeyne, The Man Who Was Thursday, which he liked without understanding; Stover at Yale, that became somewhat of a textbook; Dombey and Son, because he thought he really should read better stuff; Robert Chambers, David Graham Phillips, and E. Phillips Oppenheim complete, and a scattering of Tennyson and Kipling. Of all his class work only L’Allegro and some quality of rigid clarity in solid geometry stirred his languid interest.	The New Arabian Nights

stirred his languid interest.	He read voluminously all spring, the beginning of his eighteenth year: The Gentleman from Indiana, The New Arabian Nights, The Morals of Marcus Ordeyne, The Man Who Was Thursday, which he liked without understanding; Stover at Yale, that became somewhat of a textbook; Dombey and Son, because he thought he really should read better stuff; Robert Chambers, David Graham Phillips, and E. Phillips Oppenheim complete, and a scattering of Tennyson and Kipling. Of all his class work only L’Allegro and some quality of rigid clarity in solid geometry stirred his languid interest. As June drew near, he felt the need of conversation to formulate his own ideas, and, to his surprise, found a co-philosopher in Rahill, the president of the sixth form.	slightly interested him.

his languid interest	He read voluminously all spring, the beginning of his eighteenth year: The Gentleman from Indiana, The New Arabian Nights, The Morals of Marcus Ordeyne, The Man Who Was Thursday, which he liked without understanding; Stover at Yale, that became somewhat of a textbook; Dombey and Son, because he thought he really should read better stuff; Robert Chambers, David Graham Phillips, and E. Phillips Oppenheim complete, and a scattering of Tennyson and Kipling. Of all his class work only L’Allegro and some quality of rigid clarity in solid geometry stirred his languid interest. As June drew near, he felt the need of conversation to formulate his own ideas, and, to his surprise, found a co-philosopher in Rahill, the president of the sixth form.	his weak interest

rigid clarity	He read voluminously all spring, the beginning of his eighteenth year: The Gentleman from Indiana, The New Arabian Nights, The Morals of Marcus Ordeyne, The Man Who Was Thursday, which he liked without understanding; Stover at Yale, that became somewhat of a textbook; Dombey and Son, because he thought he really should read better stuff; Robert Chambers, David Graham Phillips, and E. Phillips Oppenheim complete, and a scattering of Tennyson and Kipling. Of all his class work only L’Allegro and some quality of rigid clarity in solid geometry stirred his languid interest. As June drew near, he felt the need of conversation to formulate his own ideas, and, to his surprise, found a co-philosopher in Rahill, the president of the sixth form.	clear and precise

found a co-philosopher in Rahill, the president of the sixth form.	Of all his class work only L’Allegro and some quality of rigid clarity in solid geometry stirred his languid interest. As June drew near, he felt the need of conversation to formulate his own ideas, and, to his surprise, found a co-philosopher in Rahill, the president of the sixth form. In many a talk, on the high road or lying belly-down along the edge of the baseball diamond, or late at night with their cigarettes glowing in the dark, they threshed out the questions of school, and there was developed the term “slicker.”	He found someone to discuss his ideas with in Rahill, the senior class president.

lying belly-down along the edge of the baseball diamond, or late at night with their cigarettes glowing in the dark, they threshed out the questions of school, and there was developed the term “slicker.”	As June drew near, he felt the need of conversation to formulate his own ideas, and, to his surprise, found a co-philosopher in Rahill, the president of the sixth form. In many a talk, on the high road or lying belly-down along the edge of the baseball diamond, or late at night with their cigarettes glowing in the dark, they threshed out the questions of school, and there was developed the term “slicker.” “Got tobacco?” whispered Rahill one night, putting his head inside the door five minutes after lights.	lying on their stomachs by the baseball field, or late at night with their cigarettes glowing, they thoroughly discussed school issues, and that's where the term "slicker" came about.

whispered Rahill one night, putting his head inside the door five minutes after lights.	In many a talk, on the high road or lying belly-down along the edge of the baseball diamond, or late at night with their cigarettes glowing in the dark, they threshed out the questions of school, and there was developed the term “slicker.” “Got tobacco?” whispered Rahill one night, putting his head inside the door five minutes after lights. “Sure.”	Rahill whispered one night, poking his head in the door five minutes after lights out.

lie in the window-seat, why don’t you.”	“I’m coming in.” “Take a couple of pillows and lie in the window-seat, why don’t you.” Amory sat up in bed and lit a cigarette while Rahill settled for a conversation.	Why don't you lie down on the window seat?

lit a cigarette while Rahill settled for a conversation.	“Take a couple of pillows and lie in the window-seat, why don’t you.” Amory sat up in bed and lit a cigarette while Rahill settled for a conversation. Rahill’s favorite subject was the respective futures of the sixth form, and Amory never tired of outlining them for his benefit.	lit a cigarette while Rahill got ready to talk.

Rahill’s favorite subject	Amory sat up in bed and lit a cigarette while Rahill settled for a conversation. Rahill’s favorite subject was the respective futures of the sixth form, and Amory never tired of outlining them for his benefit. “Ted Converse? ’	Rahill's favorite topic.

tired of outlining them for his benefit.	Amory sat up in bed and lit a cigarette while Rahill settled for a conversation. Rahill’s favorite subject was the respective futures of the sixth form, and Amory never tired of outlining them for his benefit. “Ted Converse? ’	tired of explaining them to him.

“Ted Converse	Rahill’s favorite subject was the respective futures of the sixth form, and Amory never tired of outlining them for his benefit. “Ted Converse? ’ At’s easy.	Ted Converse?

the freshman year	At’s easy. He’ll fail his exams, tutor all summer at Harstrum’s, get into Sheff with about four conditions, and flunk out in the middle of the freshman year. Then he’ll go back West and raise hell for a year or so; finally his father will make him go into the paint business.	the first year

flunk out in the middle of the freshman year.	At’s easy. He’ll fail his exams, tutor all summer at Harstrum’s, get into Sheff with about four conditions, and flunk out in the middle of the freshman year. Then he’ll go back West and raise hell for a year or so; finally his father will make him go into the paint business.	fail out during his first year.

raise hell for a year or so; finally his father will make him go into the paint business.	He’ll fail his exams, tutor all summer at Harstrum’s, get into Sheff with about four conditions, and flunk out in the middle of the freshman year. Then he’ll go back West and raise hell for a year or so; finally his father will make him go into the paint business. He’ll marry and have four sons, all bone heads.	cause trouble for about a year; then his father will force him to work in the paint business.

name on it—” “Hold up, Amory.	He’ll always think St. Regis’s spoiled him, so he’ll send his sons to day school in Portland. He’ll die of locomotor ataxia when he’s forty-one, and his wife will give a baptizing stand or whatever you call it to the Presbyterian Church, with his name on it—” “Hold up, Amory. That’s too darned gloomy.	name on it-- Wait, Amory.

the Presbyterian Church	He’ll always think St. Regis’s spoiled him, so he’ll send his sons to day school in Portland. He’ll die of locomotor ataxia when he’s forty-one, and his wife will give a baptizing stand or whatever you call it to the Presbyterian Church, with his name on it—” “Hold up, Amory. That’s too darned gloomy.	the Presbyterian Church

locomotor ataxia	He’ll always think St. Regis’s spoiled him, so he’ll send his sons to day school in Portland. He’ll die of locomotor ataxia when he’s forty-one, and his wife will give a baptizing stand or whatever you call it to the Presbyterian Church, with his name on it—” “Hold up, Amory. That’s too darned gloomy.	A disease that affects the spinal cord.

a baptizing stand	He’ll always think St. Regis’s spoiled him, so he’ll send his sons to day school in Portland. He’ll die of locomotor ataxia when he’s forty-one, and his wife will give a baptizing stand or whatever you call it to the Presbyterian Church, with his name on it—” “Hold up, Amory. That’s too darned gloomy.	A baptismal font.

a darn good head	“Sure you are. You’ve got a darn good head on you.” But Amory knew that nothing in the abstract, no theory or generality, ever moved Rahill until he stubbed his toe upon the concrete minutiae of it.	smart

got a darn good head on you.”	“Sure you are. You’ve got a darn good head on you.” But Amory knew that nothing in the abstract, no theory or generality, ever moved Rahill until he stubbed his toe upon the concrete minutiae of it.	You're really smart.

the concrete minutiae	You’ve got a darn good head on you.” But Amory knew that nothing in the abstract, no theory or generality, ever moved Rahill until he stubbed his toe upon the concrete minutiae of it. “Haven’t,” insisted Rahill.	the specific details

stubbed his toe upon the concrete minutiae of it.	You’ve got a darn good head on you.” But Amory knew that nothing in the abstract, no theory or generality, ever moved Rahill until he stubbed his toe upon the concrete minutiae of it. “Haven’t,” insisted Rahill.	ran into the specific details of it.

keep my temper when they get selfish and then they think they pay me back by voting for me and telling me I’m the ‘big man’ of St. Regis’s.	“I let people impose on me here and don’t get anything out of it. I’m the prey of my friends, damn it—do their lessons, get ’em out of trouble, pay ’em stupid summer visits, and always entertain their kid sisters; keep my temper when they get selfish and then they think they pay me back by voting for me and telling me I’m the ‘big man’ of St. Regis’s. I want to get where everybody does their own work and I can tell people where to go.	I stay calm when they're selfish, and then they think they're repaying me by voting for me and calling me the 'big man' at St. Regis's.

is when a fellow slicks his hair back with water.”	Amory considered. “Why—why, I suppose that the sign of it is when a fellow slicks his hair back with water.” “Like Carstairs?”	is when a guy slicks his hair back with water.

means on the broad path of honesty to get ahead, be popular, admired, and never in trouble.	They spent two evenings getting an exact definition. The slicker was good-looking or clean-looking; he had brains, social brains, that is, and he used all means on the broad path of honesty to get ahead, be popular, admired, and never in trouble. He dressed well, was particularly neat in appearance, and derived his name from the fact that his hair was inevitably worn short, soaked in water or tonic, parted in the middle, and slicked back as the current of fashion dictated.	used honest methods to succeed, be liked, admired, and stay out of trouble.

soaked in water or tonic, parted in the middle, and slicked back as the current of fashion dictated.	The slicker was good-looking or clean-looking; he had brains, social brains, that is, and he used all means on the broad path of honesty to get ahead, be popular, admired, and never in trouble. He dressed well, was particularly neat in appearance, and derived his name from the fact that his hair was inevitably worn short, soaked in water or tonic, parted in the middle, and slicked back as the current of fashion dictated. The slickers of that year had adopted tortoiseshell spectacles as badges of their slickerhood, and this made them so easy to recognize that Amory and Rahill never missed one.	wet with water or hair tonic, parted down the center, and styled back following the trend.

adopted tortoiseshell spectacles as badges of their slickerhood, and this made them so easy to recognize that Amory and Rahill never missed one.	He dressed well, was particularly neat in appearance, and derived his name from the fact that his hair was inevitably worn short, soaked in water or tonic, parted in the middle, and slicked back as the current of fashion dictated. The slickers of that year had adopted tortoiseshell spectacles as badges of their slickerhood, and this made them so easy to recognize that Amory and Rahill never missed one. The slicker seemed distributed through school, always a little wiser and shrewder than his contemporaries, managing some team or other, and keeping his cleverness carefully concealed.	wore tortoiseshell glasses as a symbol of their group, which made them easily identifiable, so Amory and Rahill always spotted them.

tortoiseshell spectacles	He dressed well, was particularly neat in appearance, and derived his name from the fact that his hair was inevitably worn short, soaked in water or tonic, parted in the middle, and slicked back as the current of fashion dictated. The slickers of that year had adopted tortoiseshell spectacles as badges of their slickerhood, and this made them so easy to recognize that Amory and Rahill never missed one. The slicker seemed distributed through school, always a little wiser and shrewder than his contemporaries, managing some team or other, and keeping his cleverness carefully concealed.	glasses with brown speckled frames

wiser and shrewder than his contemporaries, managing some team or other, and keeping his cleverness carefully concealed.	The slickers of that year had adopted tortoiseshell spectacles as badges of their slickerhood, and this made them so easy to recognize that Amory and Rahill never missed one. The slicker seemed distributed through school, always a little wiser and shrewder than his contemporaries, managing some team or other, and keeping his cleverness carefully concealed. Amory found the slicker a most valuable classification until his junior year in college, when the outline became so blurred and indeterminate that it had to be subdivided many times, and became only a quality.	more intelligent and cunning than other students, usually running a team or club, and hiding how smart they really were.

year in college, when the outline became so blurred and indeterminate that it had to be subdivided many times, and became only a quality.	The slicker seemed distributed through school, always a little wiser and shrewder than his contemporaries, managing some team or other, and keeping his cleverness carefully concealed. Amory found the slicker a most valuable classification until his junior year in college, when the outline became so blurred and indeterminate that it had to be subdivided many times, and became only a quality. Amory’s secret ideal had all the slicker qualifications, but, in addition, courage and tremendous brains and talents—also Amory conceded him a bizarre streak that was quite irreconcilable to the slicker proper.	year in college, the idea became so vague and unclear that it had to be broken down further and became just a characteristic.

the slicker a most valuable classification	The slicker seemed distributed through school, always a little wiser and shrewder than his contemporaries, managing some team or other, and keeping his cleverness carefully concealed. Amory found the slicker a most valuable classification until his junior year in college, when the outline became so blurred and indeterminate that it had to be subdivided many times, and became only a quality. Amory’s secret ideal had all the slicker qualifications, but, in addition, courage and tremendous brains and talents—also Amory conceded him a bizarre streak that was quite irreconcilable to the slicker proper.	the slicker a useful label

Amory’s secret ideal	Amory found the slicker a most valuable classification until his junior year in college, when the outline became so blurred and indeterminate that it had to be subdivided many times, and became only a quality. Amory’s secret ideal had all the slicker qualifications, but, in addition, courage and tremendous brains and talents—also Amory conceded him a bizarre streak that was quite irreconcilable to the slicker proper. This was a first real break from the hypocrisy of school tradition.	Amory's private perfect image.

the slicker proper	Amory found the slicker a most valuable classification until his junior year in college, when the outline became so blurred and indeterminate that it had to be subdivided many times, and became only a quality. Amory’s secret ideal had all the slicker qualifications, but, in addition, courage and tremendous brains and talents—also Amory conceded him a bizarre streak that was quite irreconcilable to the slicker proper. This was a first real break from the hypocrisy of school tradition.	the typical slicker

streak that was quite irreconcilable to the slicker proper.	Amory found the slicker a most valuable classification until his junior year in college, when the outline became so blurred and indeterminate that it had to be subdivided many times, and became only a quality. Amory’s secret ideal had all the slicker qualifications, but, in addition, courage and tremendous brains and talents—also Amory conceded him a bizarre streak that was quite irreconcilable to the slicker proper. This was a first real break from the hypocrisy of school tradition.	a characteristic that didn't fit the typical "slicker" image.

all the slicker qualifications	Amory found the slicker a most valuable classification until his junior year in college, when the outline became so blurred and indeterminate that it had to be subdivided many times, and became only a quality. Amory’s secret ideal had all the slicker qualifications, but, in addition, courage and tremendous brains and talents—also Amory conceded him a bizarre streak that was quite irreconcilable to the slicker proper. This was a first real break from the hypocrisy of school tradition.	all the qualities of a popular guy

hypocrisy of school tradition.	Amory’s secret ideal had all the slicker qualifications, but, in addition, courage and tremendous brains and talents—also Amory conceded him a bizarre streak that was quite irreconcilable to the slicker proper. This was a first real break from the hypocrisy of school tradition. The slicker was a definite element of success, differing intrinsically from the prep school “big man.”	pretending to value traditions that don't matter.

a definite element	This was a first real break from the hypocrisy of school tradition. The slicker was a definite element of success, differing intrinsically from the prep school “big man.”	certain factor

the leaded windowpanes	At first Amory noticed only the wealth of sunshine creeping across the long, green swards, dancing on the leaded windowpanes, and swimming around the tops of spires and towers and battlemented walls. Gradually he realized that he was really walking up University Place, self-conscious about his suitcase, developing a new tendency to glare straight ahead when he passed anyone.	the windows with lead frames

noticed only the wealth of sunshine creeping across the long, green swards, dancing on the leaded windowpanes, and swimming around the tops of spires and towers and battlemented walls.	At first Amory noticed only the wealth of sunshine creeping across the long, green swards, dancing on the leaded windowpanes, and swimming around the tops of spires and towers and battlemented walls. Gradually he realized that he was really walking up University Place, self-conscious about his suitcase, developing a new tendency to glare straight ahead when he passed anyone.	only saw the bright sunshine spreading over the long, green lawns, sparkling on the windows, and glowing around the tops of the spires, towers, and walls.

battlemented walls	At first Amory noticed only the wealth of sunshine creeping across the long, green swards, dancing on the leaded windowpanes, and swimming around the tops of spires and towers and battlemented walls. Gradually he realized that he was really walking up University Place, self-conscious about his suitcase, developing a new tendency to glare straight ahead when he passed anyone.	walls with battlements

the long, green swards	At first Amory noticed only the wealth of sunshine creeping across the long, green swards, dancing on the leaded windowpanes, and swimming around the tops of spires and towers and battlemented walls. Gradually he realized that he was really walking up University Place, self-conscious about his suitcase, developing a new tendency to glare straight ahead when he passed anyone.	long, green lawns

a new tendency	At first Amory noticed only the wealth of sunshine creeping across the long, green swards, dancing on the leaded windowpanes, and swimming around the tops of spires and towers and battlemented walls. Gradually he realized that he was really walking up University Place, self-conscious about his suitcase, developing a new tendency to glare straight ahead when he passed anyone. Several times he could have sworn that men turned to look at him critically.	a new habit

glare straight ahead when he passed anyone.	At first Amory noticed only the wealth of sunshine creeping across the long, green swards, dancing on the leaded windowpanes, and swimming around the tops of spires and towers and battlemented walls. Gradually he realized that he was really walking up University Place, self-conscious about his suitcase, developing a new tendency to glare straight ahead when he passed anyone. Several times he could have sworn that men turned to look at him critically.	look straight ahead and avoid eye contact.

look at him critically.	Gradually he realized that he was really walking up University Place, self-conscious about his suitcase, developing a new tendency to glare straight ahead when he passed anyone. Several times he could have sworn that men turned to look at him critically. He wondered vaguely if there was something the matter with his clothes, and wished he had shaved that morning on the train.	judge his appearance.

something the matter with his clothes, and wished he had shaved that morning on the train.	Several times he could have sworn that men turned to look at him critically. He wondered vaguely if there was something the matter with his clothes, and wished he had shaved that morning on the train. He felt unnecessarily stiff and awkward among these white-flannelled, bareheaded youths, who must be juniors and seniors, judging from the savoir faire with which they strolled.	if there was something wrong with his clothes, and regretted not shaving on the train that morning.

felt unnecessarily stiff and awkward among these white-flannelled, bareheaded youths, who must be juniors and seniors, judging from the savoir faire with which they strolled.	He wondered vaguely if there was something the matter with his clothes, and wished he had shaved that morning on the train. He felt unnecessarily stiff and awkward among these white-flannelled, bareheaded youths, who must be juniors and seniors, judging from the savoir faire with which they strolled. He found that 12 University Place was a large, dilapidated mansion, at present apparently uninhabited, though he knew it housed usually a dozen freshmen.	felt self-conscious and clumsy around these young guys in white pants and no hats, who seemed like upperclassmen because they were so confident and relaxed.

these white-flannelled, bareheaded youths	He wondered vaguely if there was something the matter with his clothes, and wished he had shaved that morning on the train. He felt unnecessarily stiff and awkward among these white-flannelled, bareheaded youths, who must be juniors and seniors, judging from the savoir faire with which they strolled. He found that 12 University Place was a large, dilapidated mansion, at present apparently uninhabited, though he knew it housed usually a dozen freshmen.	these young men in white pants with no hats

a large, dilapidated mansion	He felt unnecessarily stiff and awkward among these white-flannelled, bareheaded youths, who must be juniors and seniors, judging from the savoir faire with which they strolled. He found that 12 University Place was a large, dilapidated mansion, at present apparently uninhabited, though he knew it housed usually a dozen freshmen. After a hurried skirmish with his landlady he sallied out on a tour of exploration, but he had gone scarcely a block when he became horribly conscious that he must be the only man in town who was wearing a hat.	a big, run-down house

12 University Place	He felt unnecessarily stiff and awkward among these white-flannelled, bareheaded youths, who must be juniors and seniors, judging from the savoir faire with which they strolled. He found that 12 University Place was a large, dilapidated mansion, at present apparently uninhabited, though he knew it housed usually a dozen freshmen. After a hurried skirmish with his landlady he sallied out on a tour of exploration, but he had gone scarcely a block when he became horribly conscious that he must be the only man in town who was wearing a hat.	12 University Place

a dozen freshmen	He felt unnecessarily stiff and awkward among these white-flannelled, bareheaded youths, who must be juniors and seniors, judging from the savoir faire with which they strolled. He found that 12 University Place was a large, dilapidated mansion, at present apparently uninhabited, though he knew it housed usually a dozen freshmen. After a hurried skirmish with his landlady he sallied out on a tour of exploration, but he had gone scarcely a block when he became horribly conscious that he must be the only man in town who was wearing a hat.	twelve first-year students

was a large, dilapidated mansion, at present apparently uninhabited, though he knew it housed usually a dozen freshmen.	He felt unnecessarily stiff and awkward among these white-flannelled, bareheaded youths, who must be juniors and seniors, judging from the savoir faire with which they strolled. He found that 12 University Place was a large, dilapidated mansion, at present apparently uninhabited, though he knew it housed usually a dozen freshmen. After a hurried skirmish with his landlady he sallied out on a tour of exploration, but he had gone scarcely a block when he became horribly conscious that he must be the only man in town who was wearing a hat.	was a big, run-down house that looked empty, even though he knew it usually housed a dozen freshmen.

a hurried skirmish	He found that 12 University Place was a large, dilapidated mansion, at present apparently uninhabited, though he knew it housed usually a dozen freshmen. After a hurried skirmish with his landlady he sallied out on a tour of exploration, but he had gone scarcely a block when he became horribly conscious that he must be the only man in town who was wearing a hat. He returned hurriedly to 12 University, left his derby, and, emerging bareheaded, loitered down Nassau Street, stopping to investigate a display of athletic photographs in a store window, including a large one of Allenby, the football captain, and next attracted by the sign “Jigger Shop” over a confectionary window.	a quick argument

man in town who was wearing a hat.	He found that 12 University Place was a large, dilapidated mansion, at present apparently uninhabited, though he knew it housed usually a dozen freshmen. After a hurried skirmish with his landlady he sallied out on a tour of exploration, but he had gone scarcely a block when he became horribly conscious that he must be the only man in town who was wearing a hat. He returned hurriedly to 12 University, left his derby, and, emerging bareheaded, loitered down Nassau Street, stopping to investigate a display of athletic photographs in a store window, including a large one of Allenby, the football captain, and next attracted by the sign “Jigger Shop” over a confectionary window.	the only person in town with a hat on.

a confectionary window	After a hurried skirmish with his landlady he sallied out on a tour of exploration, but he had gone scarcely a block when he became horribly conscious that he must be the only man in town who was wearing a hat. He returned hurriedly to 12 University, left his derby, and, emerging bareheaded, loitered down Nassau Street, stopping to investigate a display of athletic photographs in a store window, including a large one of Allenby, the football captain, and next attracted by the sign “Jigger Shop” over a confectionary window. This sounded familiar, so he sauntered in and took a seat on a high stool.	a candy store window

returned hurriedly to 12 University, left his derby, and, emerging bareheaded, loitered down Nassau Street, stopping to investigate a display of athletic photographs in a store window, including a large one of Allenby, the football captain, and next attracted by the sign “Jigger Shop” over a confectionary window.	After a hurried skirmish with his landlady he sallied out on a tour of exploration, but he had gone scarcely a block when he became horribly conscious that he must be the only man in town who was wearing a hat. He returned hurriedly to 12 University, left his derby, and, emerging bareheaded, loitered down Nassau Street, stopping to investigate a display of athletic photographs in a store window, including a large one of Allenby, the football captain, and next attracted by the sign “Jigger Shop” over a confectionary window. This sounded familiar, so he sauntered in and took a seat on a high stool.	hurried back to his room at 12 University, took off his hat, and then, without a hat, strolled down Nassau Street. He stopped to look at some sports photos in a shop window, including a big one of Allenby, the football captain. Then he noticed a sign for a "Jigger Shop" above a candy store.

12 University	After a hurried skirmish with his landlady he sallied out on a tour of exploration, but he had gone scarcely a block when he became horribly conscious that he must be the only man in town who was wearing a hat. He returned hurriedly to 12 University, left his derby, and, emerging bareheaded, loitered down Nassau Street, stopping to investigate a display of athletic photographs in a store window, including a large one of Allenby, the football captain, and next attracted by the sign “Jigger Shop” over a confectionary window. This sounded familiar, so he sauntered in and took a seat on a high stool.	12 University

“Jigger Shop	After a hurried skirmish with his landlady he sallied out on a tour of exploration, but he had gone scarcely a block when he became horribly conscious that he must be the only man in town who was wearing a hat. He returned hurriedly to 12 University, left his derby, and, emerging bareheaded, loitered down Nassau Street, stopping to investigate a display of athletic photographs in a store window, including a large one of Allenby, the football captain, and next attracted by the sign “Jigger Shop” over a confectionary window. This sounded familiar, so he sauntered in and took a seat on a high stool.	Jigger Shop

a high stool	He returned hurriedly to 12 University, left his derby, and, emerging bareheaded, loitered down Nassau Street, stopping to investigate a display of athletic photographs in a store window, including a large one of Allenby, the football captain, and next attracted by the sign “Jigger Shop” over a confectionary window. This sounded familiar, so he sauntered in and took a seat on a high stool. “Chocolate sundae,” he told a colored person.	a tall stool

took a seat on a high stool.	He returned hurriedly to 12 University, left his derby, and, emerging bareheaded, loitered down Nassau Street, stopping to investigate a display of athletic photographs in a store window, including a large one of Allenby, the football captain, and next attracted by the sign “Jigger Shop” over a confectionary window. This sounded familiar, so he sauntered in and took a seat on a high stool. “Chocolate sundae,” he told a colored person.	sat down on a stool.

“Double chocolate jiggah	“Chocolate sundae,” he told a colored person. “Double chocolate jiggah? Anything else?”	Double chocolate?”

munched four of these, finding them of pleasing savor, and then consumed another double-chocolate jigger before ease descended upon him.	“Bacon bun?” “Why—yes.” He munched four of these, finding them of pleasing savor, and then consumed another double-chocolate jigger before ease descended upon him. After a cursory inspection of the pillowcases, leather pennants, and Gibson Girls that lined the walls, he left, and continued along Nassau Street with his hands in his pockets.	ate four of them, enjoying their taste, and then ate another double-chocolate treat before he started to feel relaxed.

another double-chocolate jigger	“Bacon bun?” “Why—yes.” He munched four of these, finding them of pleasing savor, and then consumed another double-chocolate jigger before ease descended upon him. After a cursory inspection of the pillowcases, leather pennants, and Gibson Girls that lined the walls, he left, and continued along Nassau Street with his hands in his pockets.	another double-chocolate cake

a cursory inspection	He munched four of these, finding them of pleasing savor, and then consumed another double-chocolate jigger before ease descended upon him. After a cursory inspection of the pillowcases, leather pennants, and Gibson Girls that lined the walls, he left, and continued along Nassau Street with his hands in his pockets. Gradually he was learning to distinguish between upper classmen and entering men, even though the freshman cap would not appear until the following Monday.	a quick look

leather pennants	He munched four of these, finding them of pleasing savor, and then consumed another double-chocolate jigger before ease descended upon him. After a cursory inspection of the pillowcases, leather pennants, and Gibson Girls that lined the walls, he left, and continued along Nassau Street with his hands in his pockets. Gradually he was learning to distinguish between upper classmen and entering men, even though the freshman cap would not appear until the following Monday.	leather flags

inspection of the pillowcases, leather pennants, and Gibson Girls that lined the walls, he left, and continued along Nassau Street with his hands in his pockets.	He munched four of these, finding them of pleasing savor, and then consumed another double-chocolate jigger before ease descended upon him. After a cursory inspection of the pillowcases, leather pennants, and Gibson Girls that lined the walls, he left, and continued along Nassau Street with his hands in his pockets. Gradually he was learning to distinguish between upper classmen and entering men, even though the freshman cap would not appear until the following Monday.	He looked briefly at the pillowcases, leather banners, and pictures of Gibson Girls on the walls, then left and walked down Nassau Street with his hands in his pockets.

appear until the following Monday.	After a cursory inspection of the pillowcases, leather pennants, and Gibson Girls that lined the walls, he left, and continued along Nassau Street with his hands in his pockets. Gradually he was learning to distinguish between upper classmen and entering men, even though the freshman cap would not appear until the following Monday. Those who were too obviously, too nervously at home were freshmen, for as each train brought a new contingent it was immediately absorbed into the hatless, white-shod, book-laden throng, whose function seemed to be to drift endlessly up and down the street, emitting great clouds of smoke from brand-new pipes.	show up until next Monday.

the freshman cap	After a cursory inspection of the pillowcases, leather pennants, and Gibson Girls that lined the walls, he left, and continued along Nassau Street with his hands in his pockets. Gradually he was learning to distinguish between upper classmen and entering men, even though the freshman cap would not appear until the following Monday. Those who were too obviously, too nervously at home were freshmen, for as each train brought a new contingent it was immediately absorbed into the hatless, white-shod, book-laden throng, whose function seemed to be to drift endlessly up and down the street, emitting great clouds of smoke from brand-new pipes.	the freshman hat

upper classmen	After a cursory inspection of the pillowcases, leather pennants, and Gibson Girls that lined the walls, he left, and continued along Nassau Street with his hands in his pockets. Gradually he was learning to distinguish between upper classmen and entering men, even though the freshman cap would not appear until the following Monday. Those who were too obviously, too nervously at home were freshmen, for as each train brought a new contingent it was immediately absorbed into the hatless, white-shod, book-laden throng, whose function seemed to be to drift endlessly up and down the street, emitting great clouds of smoke from brand-new pipes.	older students

drift endlessly up and down the street, emitting great clouds of smoke from brand-new pipes.	Gradually he was learning to distinguish between upper classmen and entering men, even though the freshman cap would not appear until the following Monday. Those who were too obviously, too nervously at home were freshmen, for as each train brought a new contingent it was immediately absorbed into the hatless, white-shod, book-laden throng, whose function seemed to be to drift endlessly up and down the street, emitting great clouds of smoke from brand-new pipes. By afternoon Amory realized that now the newest arrivals were taking him for an upper classman, and he tried conscientiously to look both pleasantly blasé and casually critical, which was as near as he could analyze the prevalent facial expression.	walk back and forth on the street, puffing out lots of smoke from their new pipes.

the hatless, white-shod, book-laden throng	Gradually he was learning to distinguish between upper classmen and entering men, even though the freshman cap would not appear until the following Monday. Those who were too obviously, too nervously at home were freshmen, for as each train brought a new contingent it was immediately absorbed into the hatless, white-shod, book-laden throng, whose function seemed to be to drift endlessly up and down the street, emitting great clouds of smoke from brand-new pipes. By afternoon Amory realized that now the newest arrivals were taking him for an upper classman, and he tried conscientiously to look both pleasantly blasé and casually critical, which was as near as he could analyze the prevalent facial expression.	the crowd without hats, wearing white shoes, and carrying books

a new contingent	Gradually he was learning to distinguish between upper classmen and entering men, even though the freshman cap would not appear until the following Monday. Those who were too obviously, too nervously at home were freshmen, for as each train brought a new contingent it was immediately absorbed into the hatless, white-shod, book-laden throng, whose function seemed to be to drift endlessly up and down the street, emitting great clouds of smoke from brand-new pipes. By afternoon Amory realized that now the newest arrivals were taking him for an upper classman, and he tried conscientiously to look both pleasantly blasé and casually critical, which was as near as he could analyze the prevalent facial expression.	a new group

an upper classman	Those who were too obviously, too nervously at home were freshmen, for as each train brought a new contingent it was immediately absorbed into the hatless, white-shod, book-laden throng, whose function seemed to be to drift endlessly up and down the street, emitting great clouds of smoke from brand-new pipes. By afternoon Amory realized that now the newest arrivals were taking him for an upper classman, and he tried conscientiously to look both pleasantly blasé and casually critical, which was as near as he could analyze the prevalent facial expression. At five o’clock he felt the need of hearing his own voice, so he retreated to his house to see if anyone else had arrived.	an older student

tried conscientiously to look both pleasantly blasé and casually critical, which was as near as he could analyze the prevalent facial expression.	Those who were too obviously, too nervously at home were freshmen, for as each train brought a new contingent it was immediately absorbed into the hatless, white-shod, book-laden throng, whose function seemed to be to drift endlessly up and down the street, emitting great clouds of smoke from brand-new pipes. By afternoon Amory realized that now the newest arrivals were taking him for an upper classman, and he tried conscientiously to look both pleasantly blasé and casually critical, which was as near as he could analyze the prevalent facial expression. At five o’clock he felt the need of hearing his own voice, so he retreated to his house to see if anyone else had arrived.	tried hard to look both bored and casually judgmental, which was how he interpreted the typical facial expression.

the prevalent facial expression	Those who were too obviously, too nervously at home were freshmen, for as each train brought a new contingent it was immediately absorbed into the hatless, white-shod, book-laden throng, whose function seemed to be to drift endlessly up and down the street, emitting great clouds of smoke from brand-new pipes. By afternoon Amory realized that now the newest arrivals were taking him for an upper classman, and he tried conscientiously to look both pleasantly blasé and casually critical, which was as near as he could analyze the prevalent facial expression. At five o’clock he felt the need of hearing his own voice, so he retreated to his house to see if anyone else had arrived.	the common look on people's faces

need of hearing his own voice, so he retreated to his house to see if anyone else had arrived.	By afternoon Amory realized that now the newest arrivals were taking him for an upper classman, and he tried conscientiously to look both pleasantly blasé and casually critical, which was as near as he could analyze the prevalent facial expression. At five o’clock he felt the need of hearing his own voice, so he retreated to his house to see if anyone else had arrived. Having climbed the rickety stairs he scrutinized his room resignedly, concluding that it was hopeless to attempt any more inspired decoration than class banners and tiger pictures.	wanted to talk, so he went back to his dorm to see if anyone else was there.

five o’clock	By afternoon Amory realized that now the newest arrivals were taking him for an upper classman, and he tried conscientiously to look both pleasantly blasé and casually critical, which was as near as he could analyze the prevalent facial expression. At five o’clock he felt the need of hearing his own voice, so he retreated to his house to see if anyone else had arrived. Having climbed the rickety stairs he scrutinized his room resignedly, concluding that it was hopeless to attempt any more inspired decoration than class banners and tiger pictures.	5 PM

scrutinized his room resignedly, concluding that it was hopeless to attempt any more inspired decoration than class banners and tiger pictures.	At five o’clock he felt the need of hearing his own voice, so he retreated to his house to see if anyone else had arrived. Having climbed the rickety stairs he scrutinized his room resignedly, concluding that it was hopeless to attempt any more inspired decoration than class banners and tiger pictures. There was a tap at the door.	looked closely at his room with disappointment, realizing he couldn't improve the decorations beyond the class banners and tiger pictures.

the rickety stairs	At five o’clock he felt the need of hearing his own voice, so he retreated to his house to see if anyone else had arrived. Having climbed the rickety stairs he scrutinized his room resignedly, concluding that it was hopeless to attempt any more inspired decoration than class banners and tiger pictures. There was a tap at the door.	the shaky stairs

any more inspired decoration	At five o’clock he felt the need of hearing his own voice, so he retreated to his house to see if anyone else had arrived. Having climbed the rickety stairs he scrutinized his room resignedly, concluding that it was hopeless to attempt any more inspired decoration than class banners and tiger pictures. There was a tap at the door.	any better decorations

face with gray eyes and a humorous smile appeared in the doorway.	“Come in!” A slim face with gray eyes and a humorous smile appeared in the doorway. “Got a hammer?”	A face with gray eyes and a smile poked its head in.

a humorous smile	“Come in!” A slim face with gray eyes and a humorous smile appeared in the doorway. “Got a hammer?”	a funny smile

Maybe Mrs. Twelve	“No—sorry. Maybe Mrs. Twelve, or whatever she goes by, has one.” The stranger advanced into the room.	Maybe Mrs. Twelve

inmate of this asylum?”	The stranger advanced into the room. “You an inmate of this asylum?” Amory nodded.	Are you a patient here?

so few freshmen	Amory had to agree that it was. “I thought of the campus,” he said, “but they say there’s so few freshmen that they’re lost. Have to sit around and study for something to do.”	not many new students

thought of the campus,” he said, “but they say there’s so few freshmen that they’re lost.	Amory had to agree that it was. “I thought of the campus,” he said, “but they say there’s so few freshmen that they’re lost. Have to sit around and study for something to do.”	I thought about the campus," he said, "but they say there are so few freshmen that they're lost.

“My name’s Holiday	The gray-eyed man decided to introduce himself. “My name’s Holiday.” “Blaine’s my name.”	"My name is Holiday."

“Blaine’s my name	“My name’s Holiday.” “Blaine’s my name.” They shook hands with the fashionable low swoop.	"My name is Blaine."

the fashionable low swoop	“Blaine’s my name.” They shook hands with the fashionable low swoop. Amory grinned.	a trendy, slight bow

shook hands with the fashionable low swoop.	“Blaine’s my name.” They shook hands with the fashionable low swoop. Amory grinned.	shook hands in the trendy, sweeping way.

Andover—where did you?”	Amory grinned. “Where’d you prep?” “Andover—where did you?” “St. Regis’s.”	Andover—where did you go to school?

“St. Regis	“Where’d you prep?” “Andover—where did you?” “St. Regis’s.” “Oh, did you?	"St. Regis."

meet his brother for dinner at six.	I had a cousin there.” They discussed the cousin thoroughly, and then Holiday announced that he was to meet his brother for dinner at six. “Come along and have a bite with us.”	Meeting his brother for dinner at six.

anaemic vegetables	“All right.” At the Kenilworth Amory met Burne Holiday—he of the gray eyes was Kerry—and during a limpid meal of thin soup and anaemic vegetables they stared at the other freshmen, who sat either in small groups looking very ill at ease, or in large groups seeming very much at home. “I hear Commons is pretty bad,” said Amory.	Pale vegetables

the Kenilworth Amory	“All right.” At the Kenilworth Amory met Burne Holiday—he of the gray eyes was Kerry—and during a limpid meal of thin soup and anaemic vegetables they stared at the other freshmen, who sat either in small groups looking very ill at ease, or in large groups seeming very much at home. “I hear Commons is pretty bad,” said Amory.	Kenilworth Armory

the other freshmen	“All right.” At the Kenilworth Amory met Burne Holiday—he of the gray eyes was Kerry—and during a limpid meal of thin soup and anaemic vegetables they stared at the other freshmen, who sat either in small groups looking very ill at ease, or in large groups seeming very much at home. “I hear Commons is pretty bad,” said Amory.	the other first-year students

he of the gray eyes was Kerry—and during a limpid meal of thin soup and anaemic vegetables they stared at the other freshmen, who sat either in small groups looking very ill at ease, or in large groups seeming very much at home.	“All right.” At the Kenilworth Amory met Burne Holiday—he of the gray eyes was Kerry—and during a limpid meal of thin soup and anaemic vegetables they stared at the other freshmen, who sat either in small groups looking very ill at ease, or in large groups seeming very much at home. “I hear Commons is pretty bad,” said Amory.	Kerry had gray eyes, and while they ate a bland meal of watery soup and tasteless vegetables, they watched the other new students. Some sat in small groups, looking uncomfortable, while others seemed perfectly at ease in large groups.

a limpid meal	“All right.” At the Kenilworth Amory met Burne Holiday—he of the gray eyes was Kerry—and during a limpid meal of thin soup and anaemic vegetables they stared at the other freshmen, who sat either in small groups looking very ill at ease, or in large groups seeming very much at home. “I hear Commons is pretty bad,” said Amory.	a bland meal

got to swallow everything the first year.	“Imposition!” “Oh, at Princeton you’ve got to swallow everything the first year. It’s like a damned prep school.”	have to accept everything during freshman year.

’s like a damned prep school.”	“Oh, at Princeton you’ve got to swallow everything the first year. It’s like a damned prep school.” Amory agreed.	It's like a really strict boarding school.

Lot of pep, though,” he insisted.	Amory agreed. “Lot of pep, though,” he insisted. “I wouldn’t have gone to Yale for a million.”	He's got a lot of energy, though, he insisted.

the elder brother	“Me either.” “You going out for anything?” inquired Amory of the elder brother. “Not me—Burne here is going out for the Prince—the Daily Princetonian, you know.”	the older brother

Amory of the elder brother.	“Me either.” “You going out for anything?” inquired Amory of the elder brother. “Not me—Burne here is going out for the Prince—the Daily Princetonian, you know.”	Amory asked the older brother.

Prince—the Daily Princetonian, you know.”	“You going out for anything?” inquired Amory of the elder brother. “Not me—Burne here is going out for the Prince—the Daily Princetonian, you know.” “Yes, I know.”	Prince—you know, the Daily Princetonian."

the Daily Princetonian	“You going out for anything?” inquired Amory of the elder brother. “Not me—Burne here is going out for the Prince—the Daily Princetonian, you know.” “Yes, I know.”	the Daily Princetonian

freshman football	“Why—yes. I’m going to take a whack at freshman football.” “Play at St. Regis’s?”	freshman football

take a whack at freshman football.”	“Why—yes. I’m going to take a whack at freshman football.” “Play at St. Regis’s?”	try out for the freshman football team.

Play at St. Regis’s?”	I’m going to take a whack at freshman football.” “Play at St. Regis’s?” “Some,” admitted Amory depreciatingly, “but I’m getting so damned thin.”	Do you play for St. Regis?

Amory depreciatingly	“Play at St. Regis’s?” “Some,” admitted Amory depreciatingly, “but I’m getting so damned thin.” “You’re not thin.”	Amory said, trying to make it sound unimportant.

the wild yelling	“Oh!” After supper they attended the movies, where Amory was fascinated by the glib comments of a man in front of him, as well as by the wild yelling and shouting. “Yoho!”	loud shouting

comments of a man in front of him, as well as by the wild yelling and shouting.	“Oh!” After supper they attended the movies, where Amory was fascinated by the glib comments of a man in front of him, as well as by the wild yelling and shouting. “Yoho!”	the comments someone in front of him made, and the loud yelling and shouting.

the glib comments	“Oh!” After supper they attended the movies, where Amory was fascinated by the glib comments of a man in front of him, as well as by the wild yelling and shouting. “Yoho!”	the smooth or clever remarks

baby—you’re so big and strong, but oh, so gentle!”	“Yoho!” “Oh, honey-baby—you’re so big and strong, but oh, so gentle!” “Clinch!”	Baby, you're so big and strong, but oh, so gentle!

“Oh, Clinch	“Clinch!” “Oh, Clinch!” “Kiss her, kiss ’at lady, quick!”	Oh, Clinch!

whistling “By the Sea,” and the audience took it up noisily.	“Oh-h-h—!” A group began whistling “By the Sea,” and the audience took it up noisily. This was followed by an indistinguishable song that included much stamping and then by an endless, incoherent dirge.	whistling "By the Sea," and the audience joined in loudly.

much stamping	A group began whistling “By the Sea,” and the audience took it up noisily. This was followed by an indistinguishable song that included much stamping and then by an endless, incoherent dirge. “Oh-h-h-h-h	a lot of stomping

song that included much stamping and then by an endless, incoherent dirge.	A group began whistling “By the Sea,” and the audience took it up noisily. This was followed by an indistinguishable song that included much stamping and then by an endless, incoherent dirge. “Oh-h-h-h-h	a song with a lot of stomping, followed by a long, rambling, and meaningless song.

an endless, incoherent dirge	A group began whistling “By the Sea,” and the audience took it up noisily. This was followed by an indistinguishable song that included much stamping and then by an endless, incoherent dirge. “Oh-h-h-h-h	a long, confusing, and sad song

an indistinguishable song	A group began whistling “By the Sea,” and the audience took it up noisily. This was followed by an indistinguishable song that included much stamping and then by an endless, incoherent dirge. “Oh-h-h-h-h	a song you couldn't make out

works in a Jam Factoree And—that-may-be-all-right	“Oh-h-h-h-h She works in a Jam Factoree And—that-may-be-all-right But you can’t-fool-me For I know—damn—well That she don’t-make-jam-all-night!	Works in a jam factory and that might be okay.

a Jam Factoree	“Oh-h-h-h-h She works in a Jam Factoree And—that-may-be-all-right But you can’t-fool-me For I know—damn—well That she don’t-make-jam-all-night!	A jam factory.

you can’t-fool-me For I know—damn—well That she don’t-make-jam-all-night!	She works in a Jam Factoree And—that-may-be-all-right But you can’t-fool-me For I know—damn—well That she don’t-make-jam-all-night! Oh-h-h-h!”	You can't fool me, because I know damn well that she doesn't make jam all night!

curious impersonal glances	Oh-h-h-h!” As they pushed out, giving and receiving curious impersonal glances, Amory decided that he liked the movies, wanted to enjoy them as the row of upper classmen in front had enjoyed them, with their arms along the backs of the seats, their comments Gaelic and caustic, their attitude a mixture of critical wit and tolerant amusement. “Want a sundae—I mean a jigger?” asked Kerry.	Interested, but not really caring, looks.

pushed out, giving and receiving curious impersonal glances, Amory decided that he liked the movies, wanted to enjoy them as the row of upper classmen in front had enjoyed them, with their arms along the backs of the seats, their comments Gaelic and caustic, their attitude a mixture of critical wit and tolerant amusement.	Oh-h-h-h!” As they pushed out, giving and receiving curious impersonal glances, Amory decided that he liked the movies, wanted to enjoy them as the row of upper classmen in front had enjoyed them, with their arms along the backs of the seats, their comments Gaelic and caustic, their attitude a mixture of critical wit and tolerant amusement. “Want a sundae—I mean a jigger?” asked Kerry.	As they left, exchanging quick, indifferent looks with others, Amory realized he enjoyed the movies and wanted to experience them like the older students in front, who relaxed with their arms on the seats, making sharp, witty remarks, and acting both clever and amused.

upper classmen	Oh-h-h-h!” As they pushed out, giving and receiving curious impersonal glances, Amory decided that he liked the movies, wanted to enjoy them as the row of upper classmen in front had enjoyed them, with their arms along the backs of the seats, their comments Gaelic and caustic, their attitude a mixture of critical wit and tolerant amusement. “Want a sundae—I mean a jigger?” asked Kerry.	older students

tolerant amusement	Oh-h-h-h!” As they pushed out, giving and receiving curious impersonal glances, Amory decided that he liked the movies, wanted to enjoy them as the row of upper classmen in front had enjoyed them, with their arms along the backs of the seats, their comments Gaelic and caustic, their attitude a mixture of critical wit and tolerant amusement. “Want a sundae—I mean a jigger?” asked Kerry.	accepting humor

back to 12.	“Sure.” They suppered heavily and then, still sauntering, eased back to 12. “Wonderful night.”	back to house number 12.

sit for a while on the front steps, so he bade them good night.	Come on, Burne.” Amory decided to sit for a while on the front steps, so he bade them good night. The great tapestries of trees had darkened to ghosts back at the last edge of twilight.	sit on the steps for a bit, then said good night.

The great tapestries	Amory decided to sit for a while on the front steps, so he bade them good night. The great tapestries of trees had darkened to ghosts back at the last edge of twilight. The early moon had drenched the arches with pale blue, and, weaving over the night, in and out of the gossamer rifts of moon, swept a song, a song with more than a hint of sadness, infinitely transient, infinitely regretful.	The huge wall hangings

tapestries of trees had darkened to ghosts back at the last edge of twilight.	Amory decided to sit for a while on the front steps, so he bade them good night. The great tapestries of trees had darkened to ghosts back at the last edge of twilight. The early moon had drenched the arches with pale blue, and, weaving over the night, in and out of the gossamer rifts of moon, swept a song, a song with more than a hint of sadness, infinitely transient, infinitely regretful.	The trees looked like dark, fading shapes as the last bit of daylight disappeared.

rifts of moon, swept a song, a song with more than a hint of sadness, infinitely transient, infinitely regretful.	The great tapestries of trees had darkened to ghosts back at the last edge of twilight. The early moon had drenched the arches with pale blue, and, weaving over the night, in and out of the gossamer rifts of moon, swept a song, a song with more than a hint of sadness, infinitely transient, infinitely regretful. He remembered that an alumnus of the nineties had told him of one of Booth Tarkington’s amusements: standing in mid-campus in the small hours and singing tenor songs to the stars, arousing mingled emotions in the couched undergraduates according to the sentiment of their moods.	Moonlight shone through gaps in the clouds, and a sad, fleeting, and regretful song drifted through the night.

the gossamer rifts	The great tapestries of trees had darkened to ghosts back at the last edge of twilight. The early moon had drenched the arches with pale blue, and, weaving over the night, in and out of the gossamer rifts of moon, swept a song, a song with more than a hint of sadness, infinitely transient, infinitely regretful. He remembered that an alumnus of the nineties had told him of one of Booth Tarkington’s amusements: standing in mid-campus in the small hours and singing tenor songs to the stars, arousing mingled emotions in the couched undergraduates according to the sentiment of their moods.	the thin, gauzy openings

the couched undergraduates	The early moon had drenched the arches with pale blue, and, weaving over the night, in and out of the gossamer rifts of moon, swept a song, a song with more than a hint of sadness, infinitely transient, infinitely regretful. He remembered that an alumnus of the nineties had told him of one of Booth Tarkington’s amusements: standing in mid-campus in the small hours and singing tenor songs to the stars, arousing mingled emotions in the couched undergraduates according to the sentiment of their moods. Now, far down the shadowy line of University Place a white-clad phalanx broke the gloom, and marching figures, white-shirted, white-trousered, swung rhythmically up the street, with linked arms and heads thrown back: “Going back—going back, Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall, Going back—going back— To the—Best—Old—Place—of—All.	the undergraduates lying in their rooms

tenor songs	The early moon had drenched the arches with pale blue, and, weaving over the night, in and out of the gossamer rifts of moon, swept a song, a song with more than a hint of sadness, infinitely transient, infinitely regretful. He remembered that an alumnus of the nineties had told him of one of Booth Tarkington’s amusements: standing in mid-campus in the small hours and singing tenor songs to the stars, arousing mingled emotions in the couched undergraduates according to the sentiment of their moods. Now, far down the shadowy line of University Place a white-clad phalanx broke the gloom, and marching figures, white-shirted, white-trousered, swung rhythmically up the street, with linked arms and heads thrown back: “Going back—going back, Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall, Going back—going back— To the—Best—Old—Place—of—All.	songs sung by a tenor

Booth Tarkington’s amusements	The early moon had drenched the arches with pale blue, and, weaving over the night, in and out of the gossamer rifts of moon, swept a song, a song with more than a hint of sadness, infinitely transient, infinitely regretful. He remembered that an alumnus of the nineties had told him of one of Booth Tarkington’s amusements: standing in mid-campus in the small hours and singing tenor songs to the stars, arousing mingled emotions in the couched undergraduates according to the sentiment of their moods. Now, far down the shadowy line of University Place a white-clad phalanx broke the gloom, and marching figures, white-shirted, white-trousered, swung rhythmically up the street, with linked arms and heads thrown back: “Going back—going back, Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall, Going back—going back— To the—Best—Old—Place—of—All.	Booth Tarkington's hobbies.

mingled emotions	The early moon had drenched the arches with pale blue, and, weaving over the night, in and out of the gossamer rifts of moon, swept a song, a song with more than a hint of sadness, infinitely transient, infinitely regretful. He remembered that an alumnus of the nineties had told him of one of Booth Tarkington’s amusements: standing in mid-campus in the small hours and singing tenor songs to the stars, arousing mingled emotions in the couched undergraduates according to the sentiment of their moods. Now, far down the shadowy line of University Place a white-clad phalanx broke the gloom, and marching figures, white-shirted, white-trousered, swung rhythmically up the street, with linked arms and heads thrown back: “Going back—going back, Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall, Going back—going back— To the—Best—Old—Place—of—All.	mixed feelings

told him of one of Booth Tarkington’s amusements: standing in mid-campus in the small hours and singing tenor songs to the stars, arousing mingled emotions in the couched undergraduates according to the sentiment of their moods.	The early moon had drenched the arches with pale blue, and, weaving over the night, in and out of the gossamer rifts of moon, swept a song, a song with more than a hint of sadness, infinitely transient, infinitely regretful. He remembered that an alumnus of the nineties had told him of one of Booth Tarkington’s amusements: standing in mid-campus in the small hours and singing tenor songs to the stars, arousing mingled emotions in the couched undergraduates according to the sentiment of their moods. Now, far down the shadowy line of University Place a white-clad phalanx broke the gloom, and marching figures, white-shirted, white-trousered, swung rhythmically up the street, with linked arms and heads thrown back: “Going back—going back, Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall, Going back—going back— To the—Best—Old—Place—of—All.	Booth Tarkington, he heard, liked to stand in the middle of campus late at night, singing tenor songs to the stars, which stirred up different feelings in the students watching, depending on their mood.

broke the gloom, and marching figures, white-shirted, white-trousered, swung rhythmically up the street, with linked arms and heads thrown back: “Going back—going back, Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall, Going back—going back— To the—Best—Old—Place—of—All.	He remembered that an alumnus of the nineties had told him of one of Booth Tarkington’s amusements: standing in mid-campus in the small hours and singing tenor songs to the stars, arousing mingled emotions in the couched undergraduates according to the sentiment of their moods. Now, far down the shadowy line of University Place a white-clad phalanx broke the gloom, and marching figures, white-shirted, white-trousered, swung rhythmically up the street, with linked arms and heads thrown back: “Going back—going back, Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall, Going back—going back— To the—Best—Old—Place—of—All. Going back—going back, From all—this—earthly—ball, We’ll—clear—the—track—as—we—go—back— Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall!”	pierced the darkness, and marching figures in white shirts and pants swung rhythmically up the street, arms linked and heads thrown back, singing: "Going back—going back, Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall, Going back—going back— To the—Best—Old—Place—of—All.

marching figures	He remembered that an alumnus of the nineties had told him of one of Booth Tarkington’s amusements: standing in mid-campus in the small hours and singing tenor songs to the stars, arousing mingled emotions in the couched undergraduates according to the sentiment of their moods. Now, far down the shadowy line of University Place a white-clad phalanx broke the gloom, and marching figures, white-shirted, white-trousered, swung rhythmically up the street, with linked arms and heads thrown back: “Going back—going back, Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall, Going back—going back— To the—Best—Old—Place—of—All. Going back—going back, From all—this—earthly—ball, We’ll—clear—the—track—as—we—go—back— Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall!”	people marching

the shadowy line	He remembered that an alumnus of the nineties had told him of one of Booth Tarkington’s amusements: standing in mid-campus in the small hours and singing tenor songs to the stars, arousing mingled emotions in the couched undergraduates according to the sentiment of their moods. Now, far down the shadowy line of University Place a white-clad phalanx broke the gloom, and marching figures, white-shirted, white-trousered, swung rhythmically up the street, with linked arms and heads thrown back: “Going back—going back, Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall, Going back—going back— To the—Best—Old—Place—of—All. Going back—going back, From all—this—earthly—ball, We’ll—clear—the—track—as—we—go—back— Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall!”	the dark street

a white-clad phalanx	He remembered that an alumnus of the nineties had told him of one of Booth Tarkington’s amusements: standing in mid-campus in the small hours and singing tenor songs to the stars, arousing mingled emotions in the couched undergraduates according to the sentiment of their moods. Now, far down the shadowy line of University Place a white-clad phalanx broke the gloom, and marching figures, white-shirted, white-trousered, swung rhythmically up the street, with linked arms and heads thrown back: “Going back—going back, Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall, Going back—going back— To the—Best—Old—Place—of—All. Going back—going back, From all—this—earthly—ball, We’ll—clear—the—track—as—we—go—back— Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall!”	a group dressed in white

going back, From all—this—earthly—ball, We’ll—clear—the—track—as—we—go—back— Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall!”	Now, far down the shadowy line of University Place a white-clad phalanx broke the gloom, and marching figures, white-shirted, white-trousered, swung rhythmically up the street, with linked arms and heads thrown back: “Going back—going back, Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall, Going back—going back— To the—Best—Old—Place—of—All. Going back—going back, From all—this—earthly—ball, We’ll—clear—the—track—as—we—go—back— Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall!” Amory closed his eyes as the ghostly procession drew near.	going back, From all this earthly world, We'll clear the way as we go back, Going back to Nassau Hall!

the ghostly procession	Going back—going back, From all—this—earthly—ball, We’ll—clear—the—track—as—we—go—back— Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall!” Amory closed his eyes as the ghostly procession drew near. The song soared so high that all dropped out except the tenors, who bore the melody triumphantly past the danger-point and relinquished it to the fantastic chorus.	the group of ghosts

closed his eyes as the ghostly procession drew near.	Going back—going back, From all—this—earthly—ball, We’ll—clear—the—track—as—we—go—back— Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall!” Amory closed his eyes as the ghostly procession drew near. The song soared so high that all dropped out except the tenors, who bore the melody triumphantly past the danger-point and relinquished it to the fantastic chorus.	closed his eyes as the ghostly procession got closer.

dropped out except the tenors, who bore the melody triumphantly past the danger-point and relinquished it to the fantastic chorus.	Amory closed his eyes as the ghostly procession drew near. The song soared so high that all dropped out except the tenors, who bore the melody triumphantly past the danger-point and relinquished it to the fantastic chorus. Then Amory opened his eyes, half afraid that sight would spoil the rich illusion of harmony.	Everyone stopped singing except the tenors, who carried the tune powerfully past the most difficult part and then handed it over to the amazing chorus.

the rich illusion	The song soared so high that all dropped out except the tenors, who bore the melody triumphantly past the danger-point and relinquished it to the fantastic chorus. Then Amory opened his eyes, half afraid that sight would spoil the rich illusion of harmony. He sighed eagerly.	the beautiful dream

illusion of harmony.	The song soared so high that all dropped out except the tenors, who bore the melody triumphantly past the danger-point and relinquished it to the fantastic chorus. Then Amory opened his eyes, half afraid that sight would spoil the rich illusion of harmony. He sighed eagerly.	The feeling of perfect harmony.

his hundred-and-sixty pounds	He sighed eagerly. There at the head of the white platoon marched Allenby, the football captain, slim and defiant, as if aware that this year the hopes of the college rested on him, that his hundred-and-sixty pounds were expected to dodge to victory through the heavy blue and crimson lines. Fascinated, Amory watched each rank of linked arms as it came abreast, the faces indistinct above the polo shirts, the voices blent in a paean of triumph—and then the procession passed through shadowy Campbell Arch, and the voices grew fainter as it wound eastward over the campus.	his weight

the heavy blue and crimson lines	He sighed eagerly. There at the head of the white platoon marched Allenby, the football captain, slim and defiant, as if aware that this year the hopes of the college rested on him, that his hundred-and-sixty pounds were expected to dodge to victory through the heavy blue and crimson lines. Fascinated, Amory watched each rank of linked arms as it came abreast, the faces indistinct above the polo shirts, the voices blent in a paean of triumph—and then the procession passed through shadowy Campbell Arch, and the voices grew fainter as it wound eastward over the campus.	the opposing team

head of the white platoon marched Allenby, the football captain, slim and defiant, as if aware that this year the hopes of the college rested on him, that his hundred-and-sixty pounds were expected to dodge to victory through the heavy blue and crimson lines.	He sighed eagerly. There at the head of the white platoon marched Allenby, the football captain, slim and defiant, as if aware that this year the hopes of the college rested on him, that his hundred-and-sixty pounds were expected to dodge to victory through the heavy blue and crimson lines. Fascinated, Amory watched each rank of linked arms as it came abreast, the faces indistinct above the polo shirts, the voices blent in a paean of triumph—and then the procession passed through shadowy Campbell Arch, and the voices grew fainter as it wound eastward over the campus.	Leading the group was Allenby, the football captain, who looked slim and determined, as if he knew the college's hopes for the year depended on him and that he was expected to use his 160 pounds to win against the opposing team.

the white platoon	He sighed eagerly. There at the head of the white platoon marched Allenby, the football captain, slim and defiant, as if aware that this year the hopes of the college rested on him, that his hundred-and-sixty pounds were expected to dodge to victory through the heavy blue and crimson lines. Fascinated, Amory watched each rank of linked arms as it came abreast, the faces indistinct above the polo shirts, the voices blent in a paean of triumph—and then the procession passed through shadowy Campbell Arch, and the voices grew fainter as it wound eastward over the campus.	the group in white shirts

indistinct above the polo shirts, the voices blent in a paean of triumph—and then the procession passed through shadowy Campbell Arch, and the voices grew fainter as it wound eastward over the campus.	There at the head of the white platoon marched Allenby, the football captain, slim and defiant, as if aware that this year the hopes of the college rested on him, that his hundred-and-sixty pounds were expected to dodge to victory through the heavy blue and crimson lines. Fascinated, Amory watched each rank of linked arms as it came abreast, the faces indistinct above the polo shirts, the voices blent in a paean of triumph—and then the procession passed through shadowy Campbell Arch, and the voices grew fainter as it wound eastward over the campus. The minutes passed and Amory sat there very quietly.	hard to see above their polo shirts, their voices joined together in a song of victory—and then the procession went through the dark Campbell Arch, and their voices faded as it moved east across the campus.

shadowy Campbell Arch	There at the head of the white platoon marched Allenby, the football captain, slim and defiant, as if aware that this year the hopes of the college rested on him, that his hundred-and-sixty pounds were expected to dodge to victory through the heavy blue and crimson lines. Fascinated, Amory watched each rank of linked arms as it came abreast, the faces indistinct above the polo shirts, the voices blent in a paean of triumph—and then the procession passed through shadowy Campbell Arch, and the voices grew fainter as it wound eastward over the campus. The minutes passed and Amory sat there very quietly.	dark Campbell Arch

lanes, where Witherspoon brooded like a dark mother over Whig and Clio, her Attic children, where the black Gothic snake of Little curled down to Cuyler and Patton, these in turn flinging the mystery out over the placid slope rolling to the lake.	The minutes passed and Amory sat there very quietly. He regretted the rule that would forbid freshmen to be outdoors after curfew, for he wanted to ramble through the shadowy scented lanes, where Witherspoon brooded like a dark mother over Whig and Clio, her Attic children, where the black Gothic snake of Little curled down to Cuyler and Patton, these in turn flinging the mystery out over the placid slope rolling to the lake. Princeton of the daytime filtered slowly into his consciousness—West and Reunion, redolent of the sixties, Seventy-nine Hall, brick-red and arrogant, Upper and Lower Pyne, aristocratic Elizabethan ladies not quite content to live among shopkeepers, and, topping all, climbing with clear blue aspiration, the great dreaming spires of Holder and Cleveland towers.	paths, where Witherspoon Hall seemed to watch over the Whig and Clio societies like a protective mother, and where Little Hall's dark, Gothic architecture snaked down to Cuyler and Patton Halls, which then spread a sense of mystery over the peaceful slope leading to the lake.

the shadowy scented lanes	The minutes passed and Amory sat there very quietly. He regretted the rule that would forbid freshmen to be outdoors after curfew, for he wanted to ramble through the shadowy scented lanes, where Witherspoon brooded like a dark mother over Whig and Clio, her Attic children, where the black Gothic snake of Little curled down to Cuyler and Patton, these in turn flinging the mystery out over the placid slope rolling to the lake. Princeton of the daytime filtered slowly into his consciousness—West and Reunion, redolent of the sixties, Seventy-nine Hall, brick-red and arrogant, Upper and Lower Pyne, aristocratic Elizabethan ladies not quite content to live among shopkeepers, and, topping all, climbing with clear blue aspiration, the great dreaming spires of Holder and Cleveland towers.	the dark, sweet-smelling paths

her Attic children	The minutes passed and Amory sat there very quietly. He regretted the rule that would forbid freshmen to be outdoors after curfew, for he wanted to ramble through the shadowy scented lanes, where Witherspoon brooded like a dark mother over Whig and Clio, her Attic children, where the black Gothic snake of Little curled down to Cuyler and Patton, these in turn flinging the mystery out over the placid slope rolling to the lake. Princeton of the daytime filtered slowly into his consciousness—West and Reunion, redolent of the sixties, Seventy-nine Hall, brick-red and arrogant, Upper and Lower Pyne, aristocratic Elizabethan ladies not quite content to live among shopkeepers, and, topping all, climbing with clear blue aspiration, the great dreaming spires of Holder and Cleveland towers.	her classic children

the placid slope	The minutes passed and Amory sat there very quietly. He regretted the rule that would forbid freshmen to be outdoors after curfew, for he wanted to ramble through the shadowy scented lanes, where Witherspoon brooded like a dark mother over Whig and Clio, her Attic children, where the black Gothic snake of Little curled down to Cuyler and Patton, these in turn flinging the mystery out over the placid slope rolling to the lake. Princeton of the daytime filtered slowly into his consciousness—West and Reunion, redolent of the sixties, Seventy-nine Hall, brick-red and arrogant, Upper and Lower Pyne, aristocratic Elizabethan ladies not quite content to live among shopkeepers, and, topping all, climbing with clear blue aspiration, the great dreaming spires of Holder and Cleveland towers.	the calm hill

clear blue aspiration	He regretted the rule that would forbid freshmen to be outdoors after curfew, for he wanted to ramble through the shadowy scented lanes, where Witherspoon brooded like a dark mother over Whig and Clio, her Attic children, where the black Gothic snake of Little curled down to Cuyler and Patton, these in turn flinging the mystery out over the placid slope rolling to the lake. Princeton of the daytime filtered slowly into his consciousness—West and Reunion, redolent of the sixties, Seventy-nine Hall, brick-red and arrogant, Upper and Lower Pyne, aristocratic Elizabethan ladies not quite content to live among shopkeepers, and, topping all, climbing with clear blue aspiration, the great dreaming spires of Holder and Cleveland towers. From the first he loved Princeton—its lazy beauty, its half-grasped significance, the wild moonlight revel of the rushes, the handsome, prosperous big-game crowds, and under it all the air of struggle that pervaded his class.	clear, hopeful ambition

aristocratic Elizabethan ladies	He regretted the rule that would forbid freshmen to be outdoors after curfew, for he wanted to ramble through the shadowy scented lanes, where Witherspoon brooded like a dark mother over Whig and Clio, her Attic children, where the black Gothic snake of Little curled down to Cuyler and Patton, these in turn flinging the mystery out over the placid slope rolling to the lake. Princeton of the daytime filtered slowly into his consciousness—West and Reunion, redolent of the sixties, Seventy-nine Hall, brick-red and arrogant, Upper and Lower Pyne, aristocratic Elizabethan ladies not quite content to live among shopkeepers, and, topping all, climbing with clear blue aspiration, the great dreaming spires of Holder and Cleveland towers. From the first he loved Princeton—its lazy beauty, its half-grasped significance, the wild moonlight revel of the rushes, the handsome, prosperous big-game crowds, and under it all the air of struggle that pervaded his class.	Elegant buildings from the Elizabethan era

, Seventy-nine Hall, brick-red and arrogant, Upper and Lower Pyne	He regretted the rule that would forbid freshmen to be outdoors after curfew, for he wanted to ramble through the shadowy scented lanes, where Witherspoon brooded like a dark mother over Whig and Clio, her Attic children, where the black Gothic snake of Little curled down to Cuyler and Patton, these in turn flinging the mystery out over the placid slope rolling to the lake. Princeton of the daytime filtered slowly into his consciousness—West and Reunion, redolent of the sixties, Seventy-nine Hall, brick-red and arrogant, Upper and Lower Pyne, aristocratic Elizabethan ladies not quite content to live among shopkeepers, and, topping all, climbing with clear blue aspiration, the great dreaming spires of Holder and Cleveland towers. From the first he loved Princeton—its lazy beauty, its half-grasped significance, the wild moonlight revel of the rushes, the handsome, prosperous big-game crowds, and under it all the air of struggle that pervaded his class.	Seventy-nine Hall, which was brick-red and imposing, and Upper and Lower Pyne

consciousness—West and Reunion, redolent of the sixties, Seventy-nine Hall, brick-red and arrogant, Upper and Lower Pyne, aristocratic Elizabethan ladies not quite content to live among shopkeepers, and, topping all, climbing with clear blue aspiration, the great dreaming spires of Holder and Cleveland towers.	He regretted the rule that would forbid freshmen to be outdoors after curfew, for he wanted to ramble through the shadowy scented lanes, where Witherspoon brooded like a dark mother over Whig and Clio, her Attic children, where the black Gothic snake of Little curled down to Cuyler and Patton, these in turn flinging the mystery out over the placid slope rolling to the lake. Princeton of the daytime filtered slowly into his consciousness—West and Reunion, redolent of the sixties, Seventy-nine Hall, brick-red and arrogant, Upper and Lower Pyne, aristocratic Elizabethan ladies not quite content to live among shopkeepers, and, topping all, climbing with clear blue aspiration, the great dreaming spires of Holder and Cleveland towers. From the first he loved Princeton—its lazy beauty, its half-grasped significance, the wild moonlight revel of the rushes, the handsome, prosperous big-game crowds, and under it all the air of struggle that pervaded his class.	consciousness—West and Reunion, filled with the spirit of the 1860s, Seventy-nine Hall, a proud and brick-red building, Upper and Lower Pyne, elegant and old-fashioned buildings that seemed out of place, and above everything else, the tall, inspiring towers of Holder and Cleveland, reaching towards the sky.

the great dreaming spires	He regretted the rule that would forbid freshmen to be outdoors after curfew, for he wanted to ramble through the shadowy scented lanes, where Witherspoon brooded like a dark mother over Whig and Clio, her Attic children, where the black Gothic snake of Little curled down to Cuyler and Patton, these in turn flinging the mystery out over the placid slope rolling to the lake. Princeton of the daytime filtered slowly into his consciousness—West and Reunion, redolent of the sixties, Seventy-nine Hall, brick-red and arrogant, Upper and Lower Pyne, aristocratic Elizabethan ladies not quite content to live among shopkeepers, and, topping all, climbing with clear blue aspiration, the great dreaming spires of Holder and Cleveland towers. From the first he loved Princeton—its lazy beauty, its half-grasped significance, the wild moonlight revel of the rushes, the handsome, prosperous big-game crowds, and under it all the air of struggle that pervaded his class.	the tall, beautiful towers that seemed to be lost in thought

the handsome, prosperous big-game crowds	Princeton of the daytime filtered slowly into his consciousness—West and Reunion, redolent of the sixties, Seventy-nine Hall, brick-red and arrogant, Upper and Lower Pyne, aristocratic Elizabethan ladies not quite content to live among shopkeepers, and, topping all, climbing with clear blue aspiration, the great dreaming spires of Holder and Cleveland towers. From the first he loved Princeton—its lazy beauty, its half-grasped significance, the wild moonlight revel of the rushes, the handsome, prosperous big-game crowds, and under it all the air of struggle that pervaded his class. From the day when, wild-eyed and exhausted, the jerseyed freshmen sat in the gymnasium and elected someone from Hill School class president, a Lawrenceville celebrity vice-president, a hockey star from St. Paul’s secretary, up until the end of sophomore year it never ceased, that breathless social system, that worship, seldom named, never really admitted, of the bogey “Big Man.”	the good-looking, wealthy people who went to important games

its half-grasped significance	Princeton of the daytime filtered slowly into his consciousness—West and Reunion, redolent of the sixties, Seventy-nine Hall, brick-red and arrogant, Upper and Lower Pyne, aristocratic Elizabethan ladies not quite content to live among shopkeepers, and, topping all, climbing with clear blue aspiration, the great dreaming spires of Holder and Cleveland towers. From the first he loved Princeton—its lazy beauty, its half-grasped significance, the wild moonlight revel of the rushes, the handsome, prosperous big-game crowds, and under it all the air of struggle that pervaded his class. From the day when, wild-eyed and exhausted, the jerseyed freshmen sat in the gymnasium and elected someone from Hill School class president, a Lawrenceville celebrity vice-president, a hockey star from St. Paul’s secretary, up until the end of sophomore year it never ceased, that breathless social system, that worship, seldom named, never really admitted, of the bogey “Big Man.”	its meaning that was only partially understood

beauty, its half-grasped significance, the wild moonlight revel of the rushes, the handsome, prosperous big-game crowds, and under it all the air of struggle that pervaded his class.	Princeton of the daytime filtered slowly into his consciousness—West and Reunion, redolent of the sixties, Seventy-nine Hall, brick-red and arrogant, Upper and Lower Pyne, aristocratic Elizabethan ladies not quite content to live among shopkeepers, and, topping all, climbing with clear blue aspiration, the great dreaming spires of Holder and Cleveland towers. From the first he loved Princeton—its lazy beauty, its half-grasped significance, the wild moonlight revel of the rushes, the handsome, prosperous big-game crowds, and under it all the air of struggle that pervaded his class. From the day when, wild-eyed and exhausted, the jerseyed freshmen sat in the gymnasium and elected someone from Hill School class president, a Lawrenceville celebrity vice-president, a hockey star from St. Paul’s secretary, up until the end of sophomore year it never ceased, that breathless social system, that worship, seldom named, never really admitted, of the bogey “Big Man.”	its appealing appearance, its not-fully-understood importance, the exciting nighttime celebrations, the attractive and wealthy people at sporting events, and the underlying sense of competition among his classmates.

that breathless social system	From the first he loved Princeton—its lazy beauty, its half-grasped significance, the wild moonlight revel of the rushes, the handsome, prosperous big-game crowds, and under it all the air of struggle that pervaded his class. From the day when, wild-eyed and exhausted, the jerseyed freshmen sat in the gymnasium and elected someone from Hill School class president, a Lawrenceville celebrity vice-president, a hockey star from St. Paul’s secretary, up until the end of sophomore year it never ceased, that breathless social system, that worship, seldom named, never really admitted, of the bogey “Big Man.” First it was schools, and Amory, alone from St. Regis’, watched the crowds form and widen and form again; St. Paul’s, Hill, Pomfret, eating at certain tacitly reserved tables in Commons, dressing in their own corners of the gymnasium, and drawing unconsciously about them a barrier of the slightly less important but socially ambitious to protect them from the friendly, rather puzzled high-school element.	that intense social scene

sophomore year	From the first he loved Princeton—its lazy beauty, its half-grasped significance, the wild moonlight revel of the rushes, the handsome, prosperous big-game crowds, and under it all the air of struggle that pervaded his class. From the day when, wild-eyed and exhausted, the jerseyed freshmen sat in the gymnasium and elected someone from Hill School class president, a Lawrenceville celebrity vice-president, a hockey star from St. Paul’s secretary, up until the end of sophomore year it never ceased, that breathless social system, that worship, seldom named, never really admitted, of the bogey “Big Man.” First it was schools, and Amory, alone from St. Regis’, watched the crowds form and widen and form again; St. Paul’s, Hill, Pomfret, eating at certain tacitly reserved tables in Commons, dressing in their own corners of the gymnasium, and drawing unconsciously about them a barrier of the slightly less important but socially ambitious to protect them from the friendly, rather puzzled high-school element.	second year

admitted, of the bogey “Big Man.”	From the first he loved Princeton—its lazy beauty, its half-grasped significance, the wild moonlight revel of the rushes, the handsome, prosperous big-game crowds, and under it all the air of struggle that pervaded his class. From the day when, wild-eyed and exhausted, the jerseyed freshmen sat in the gymnasium and elected someone from Hill School class president, a Lawrenceville celebrity vice-president, a hockey star from St. Paul’s secretary, up until the end of sophomore year it never ceased, that breathless social system, that worship, seldom named, never really admitted, of the bogey “Big Man.” First it was schools, and Amory, alone from St. Regis’, watched the crowds form and widen and form again; St. Paul’s, Hill, Pomfret, eating at certain tacitly reserved tables in Commons, dressing in their own corners of the gymnasium, and drawing unconsciously about them a barrier of the slightly less important but socially ambitious to protect them from the friendly, rather puzzled high-school element.	admitted, of the phantom "Big Man."

St. Paul’s secretary	From the first he loved Princeton—its lazy beauty, its half-grasped significance, the wild moonlight revel of the rushes, the handsome, prosperous big-game crowds, and under it all the air of struggle that pervaded his class. From the day when, wild-eyed and exhausted, the jerseyed freshmen sat in the gymnasium and elected someone from Hill School class president, a Lawrenceville celebrity vice-president, a hockey star from St. Paul’s secretary, up until the end of sophomore year it never ceased, that breathless social system, that worship, seldom named, never really admitted, of the bogey “Big Man.” First it was schools, and Amory, alone from St. Regis’, watched the crowds form and widen and form again; St. Paul’s, Hill, Pomfret, eating at certain tacitly reserved tables in Commons, dressing in their own corners of the gymnasium, and drawing unconsciously about them a barrier of the slightly less important but socially ambitious to protect them from the friendly, rather puzzled high-school element.	Secretary from St. Paul's

the bogey “Big Man	From the first he loved Princeton—its lazy beauty, its half-grasped significance, the wild moonlight revel of the rushes, the handsome, prosperous big-game crowds, and under it all the air of struggle that pervaded his class. From the day when, wild-eyed and exhausted, the jerseyed freshmen sat in the gymnasium and elected someone from Hill School class president, a Lawrenceville celebrity vice-president, a hockey star from St. Paul’s secretary, up until the end of sophomore year it never ceased, that breathless social system, that worship, seldom named, never really admitted, of the bogey “Big Man.” First it was schools, and Amory, alone from St. Regis’, watched the crowds form and widen and form again; St. Paul’s, Hill, Pomfret, eating at certain tacitly reserved tables in Commons, dressing in their own corners of the gymnasium, and drawing unconsciously about them a barrier of the slightly less important but socially ambitious to protect them from the friendly, rather puzzled high-school element.	the obsession with being a "Big Man"

the jerseyed freshmen	From the first he loved Princeton—its lazy beauty, its half-grasped significance, the wild moonlight revel of the rushes, the handsome, prosperous big-game crowds, and under it all the air of struggle that pervaded his class. From the day when, wild-eyed and exhausted, the jerseyed freshmen sat in the gymnasium and elected someone from Hill School class president, a Lawrenceville celebrity vice-president, a hockey star from St. Paul’s secretary, up until the end of sophomore year it never ceased, that breathless social system, that worship, seldom named, never really admitted, of the bogey “Big Man.” First it was schools, and Amory, alone from St. Regis’, watched the crowds form and widen and form again; St. Paul’s, Hill, Pomfret, eating at certain tacitly reserved tables in Commons, dressing in their own corners of the gymnasium, and drawing unconsciously about them a barrier of the slightly less important but socially ambitious to protect them from the friendly, rather puzzled high-school element.	freshmen wearing jerseys

a Lawrenceville celebrity vice	From the first he loved Princeton—its lazy beauty, its half-grasped significance, the wild moonlight revel of the rushes, the handsome, prosperous big-game crowds, and under it all the air of struggle that pervaded his class. From the day when, wild-eyed and exhausted, the jerseyed freshmen sat in the gymnasium and elected someone from Hill School class president, a Lawrenceville celebrity vice-president, a hockey star from St. Paul’s secretary, up until the end of sophomore year it never ceased, that breathless social system, that worship, seldom named, never really admitted, of the bogey “Big Man.” First it was schools, and Amory, alone from St. Regis’, watched the crowds form and widen and form again; St. Paul’s, Hill, Pomfret, eating at certain tacitly reserved tables in Commons, dressing in their own corners of the gymnasium, and drawing unconsciously about them a barrier of the slightly less important but socially ambitious to protect them from the friendly, rather puzzled high-school element.	a famous person from Lawrenceville as vice-president

the friendly, rather puzzled high-school element	From the day when, wild-eyed and exhausted, the jerseyed freshmen sat in the gymnasium and elected someone from Hill School class president, a Lawrenceville celebrity vice-president, a hockey star from St. Paul’s secretary, up until the end of sophomore year it never ceased, that breathless social system, that worship, seldom named, never really admitted, of the bogey “Big Man.” First it was schools, and Amory, alone from St. Regis’, watched the crowds form and widen and form again; St. Paul’s, Hill, Pomfret, eating at certain tacitly reserved tables in Commons, dressing in their own corners of the gymnasium, and drawing unconsciously about them a barrier of the slightly less important but socially ambitious to protect them from the friendly, rather puzzled high-school element. From the moment he realized this Amory resented social barriers as artificial distinctions made by the strong to bolster up their weak retainers and keep out the almost strong.	the friendly, but confused, public school kids

Hill, Pomfret	From the day when, wild-eyed and exhausted, the jerseyed freshmen sat in the gymnasium and elected someone from Hill School class president, a Lawrenceville celebrity vice-president, a hockey star from St. Paul’s secretary, up until the end of sophomore year it never ceased, that breathless social system, that worship, seldom named, never really admitted, of the bogey “Big Man.” First it was schools, and Amory, alone from St. Regis’, watched the crowds form and widen and form again; St. Paul’s, Hill, Pomfret, eating at certain tacitly reserved tables in Commons, dressing in their own corners of the gymnasium, and drawing unconsciously about them a barrier of the slightly less important but socially ambitious to protect them from the friendly, rather puzzled high-school element. From the moment he realized this Amory resented social barriers as artificial distinctions made by the strong to bolster up their weak retainers and keep out the almost strong.	Hill, Pomfret

certain tacitly reserved tables	From the day when, wild-eyed and exhausted, the jerseyed freshmen sat in the gymnasium and elected someone from Hill School class president, a Lawrenceville celebrity vice-president, a hockey star from St. Paul’s secretary, up until the end of sophomore year it never ceased, that breathless social system, that worship, seldom named, never really admitted, of the bogey “Big Man.” First it was schools, and Amory, alone from St. Regis’, watched the crowds form and widen and form again; St. Paul’s, Hill, Pomfret, eating at certain tacitly reserved tables in Commons, dressing in their own corners of the gymnasium, and drawing unconsciously about them a barrier of the slightly less important but socially ambitious to protect them from the friendly, rather puzzled high-school element. From the moment he realized this Amory resented social barriers as artificial distinctions made by the strong to bolster up their weak retainers and keep out the almost strong.	specific tables that were understood to be for certain people

tables in Commons, dressing in their own corners of the gymnasium, and drawing unconsciously about them a barrier of the slightly less important but socially ambitious to protect them from the friendly, rather puzzled high-school element.	From the day when, wild-eyed and exhausted, the jerseyed freshmen sat in the gymnasium and elected someone from Hill School class president, a Lawrenceville celebrity vice-president, a hockey star from St. Paul’s secretary, up until the end of sophomore year it never ceased, that breathless social system, that worship, seldom named, never really admitted, of the bogey “Big Man.” First it was schools, and Amory, alone from St. Regis’, watched the crowds form and widen and form again; St. Paul’s, Hill, Pomfret, eating at certain tacitly reserved tables in Commons, dressing in their own corners of the gymnasium, and drawing unconsciously about them a barrier of the slightly less important but socially ambitious to protect them from the friendly, rather puzzled high-school element. From the moment he realized this Amory resented social barriers as artificial distinctions made by the strong to bolster up their weak retainers and keep out the almost strong.	sitting at specific tables in the cafeteria, changing in their own sections of the gym, and unintentionally creating a boundary of slightly less important but socially eager people to shield them from the friendly, but confused, public-school students.

realized this Amory resented social barriers as artificial distinctions made by the strong to bolster up their weak retainers and keep out the almost strong.	First it was schools, and Amory, alone from St. Regis’, watched the crowds form and widen and form again; St. Paul’s, Hill, Pomfret, eating at certain tacitly reserved tables in Commons, dressing in their own corners of the gymnasium, and drawing unconsciously about them a barrier of the slightly less important but socially ambitious to protect them from the friendly, rather puzzled high-school element. From the moment he realized this Amory resented social barriers as artificial distinctions made by the strong to bolster up their weak retainers and keep out the almost strong. Having decided to be one of the gods of the class, he reported for freshman football practice, but in the second week, playing quarterback, already paragraphed in corners of the Princetonian, he wrenched his knee seriously enough to put him out for the rest of the season.	Amory resented social barriers as fake distinctions created by the powerful to support their weak followers and exclude those who were nearly powerful themselves.

their weak retainers	First it was schools, and Amory, alone from St. Regis’, watched the crowds form and widen and form again; St. Paul’s, Hill, Pomfret, eating at certain tacitly reserved tables in Commons, dressing in their own corners of the gymnasium, and drawing unconsciously about them a barrier of the slightly less important but socially ambitious to protect them from the friendly, rather puzzled high-school element. From the moment he realized this Amory resented social barriers as artificial distinctions made by the strong to bolster up their weak retainers and keep out the almost strong. Having decided to be one of the gods of the class, he reported for freshman football practice, but in the second week, playing quarterback, already paragraphed in corners of the Princetonian, he wrenched his knee seriously enough to put him out for the rest of the season.	their weak followers

freshman football practice	From the moment he realized this Amory resented social barriers as artificial distinctions made by the strong to bolster up their weak retainers and keep out the almost strong. Having decided to be one of the gods of the class, he reported for freshman football practice, but in the second week, playing quarterback, already paragraphed in corners of the Princetonian, he wrenched his knee seriously enough to put him out for the rest of the season. This forced him to retire and consider the situation.	football tryouts for freshmen

12 Univee	This forced him to retire and consider the situation. “12 Univee” housed a dozen miscellaneous question-marks. There were three or four inconspicuous and quite startled boys from Lawrenceville, two amateur wild men from a New York private school (Kerry Holiday christened them the “plebeian drunks”), a Jewish youth, also from New York, and, as compensation for Amory, the two Holidays, to whom he took an instant fancy.	Dorm room 12 in University Hall

the “plebeian drunks	“12 Univee” housed a dozen miscellaneous question-marks. There were three or four inconspicuous and quite startled boys from Lawrenceville, two amateur wild men from a New York private school (Kerry Holiday christened them the “plebeian drunks”), a Jewish youth, also from New York, and, as compensation for Amory, the two Holidays, to whom he took an instant fancy. The Holidays were rumored twins, but really the dark-haired one, Kerry, was a year older than his blond brother, Burne.	common drunks

three or four inconspicuous and quite startled boys	“12 Univee” housed a dozen miscellaneous question-marks. There were three or four inconspicuous and quite startled boys from Lawrenceville, two amateur wild men from a New York private school (Kerry Holiday christened them the “plebeian drunks”), a Jewish youth, also from New York, and, as compensation for Amory, the two Holidays, to whom he took an instant fancy. The Holidays were rumored twins, but really the dark-haired one, Kerry, was a year older than his blond brother, Burne.	three or four shy and surprised boys

a New York private school	“12 Univee” housed a dozen miscellaneous question-marks. There were three or four inconspicuous and quite startled boys from Lawrenceville, two amateur wild men from a New York private school (Kerry Holiday christened them the “plebeian drunks”), a Jewish youth, also from New York, and, as compensation for Amory, the two Holidays, to whom he took an instant fancy. The Holidays were rumored twins, but really the dark-haired one, Kerry, was a year older than his blond brother, Burne.	a private school in New York

really the dark-haired one	There were three or four inconspicuous and quite startled boys from Lawrenceville, two amateur wild men from a New York private school (Kerry Holiday christened them the “plebeian drunks”), a Jewish youth, also from New York, and, as compensation for Amory, the two Holidays, to whom he took an instant fancy. The Holidays were rumored twins, but really the dark-haired one, Kerry, was a year older than his blond brother, Burne. Kerry was tall, with humorous gray eyes, and a sudden, attractive smile; he became at once the mentor of the house, reaper of ears that grew too high, censor of conceit, vendor of rare, satirical humor.	the one with dark hair

brother, Burne.	There were three or four inconspicuous and quite startled boys from Lawrenceville, two amateur wild men from a New York private school (Kerry Holiday christened them the “plebeian drunks”), a Jewish youth, also from New York, and, as compensation for Amory, the two Holidays, to whom he took an instant fancy. The Holidays were rumored twins, but really the dark-haired one, Kerry, was a year older than his blond brother, Burne. Kerry was tall, with humorous gray eyes, and a sudden, attractive smile; he became at once the mentor of the house, reaper of ears that grew too high, censor of conceit, vendor of rare, satirical humor.	brother, Burne.

humorous gray eyes	The Holidays were rumored twins, but really the dark-haired one, Kerry, was a year older than his blond brother, Burne. Kerry was tall, with humorous gray eyes, and a sudden, attractive smile; he became at once the mentor of the house, reaper of ears that grew too high, censor of conceit, vendor of rare, satirical humor. Amory spread the table of their future friendship with all his ideas of what college should and did mean.	eyes that held humor

rare, satirical humor	The Holidays were rumored twins, but really the dark-haired one, Kerry, was a year older than his blond brother, Burne. Kerry was tall, with humorous gray eyes, and a sudden, attractive smile; he became at once the mentor of the house, reaper of ears that grew too high, censor of conceit, vendor of rare, satirical humor. Amory spread the table of their future friendship with all his ideas of what college should and did mean.	uncommon, mocking humor

censor of conceit, vendor of rare, satirical humor.	The Holidays were rumored twins, but really the dark-haired one, Kerry, was a year older than his blond brother, Burne. Kerry was tall, with humorous gray eyes, and a sudden, attractive smile; he became at once the mentor of the house, reaper of ears that grew too high, censor of conceit, vendor of rare, satirical humor. Amory spread the table of their future friendship with all his ideas of what college should and did mean.	He put down arrogance and offered clever, mocking jokes.

table of their future friendship with all his ideas of what college should and did mean.	Kerry was tall, with humorous gray eyes, and a sudden, attractive smile; he became at once the mentor of the house, reaper of ears that grew too high, censor of conceit, vendor of rare, satirical humor. Amory spread the table of their future friendship with all his ideas of what college should and did mean. Kerry, not inclined as yet to take things seriously, chided him gently for being curious at this inopportune time about the intricacies of the social system, but liked him and was both interested and amused.	He laid out the foundation of their friendship, based on his beliefs about college.

inclined as yet to take things seriously, chided him gently for being curious at this inopportune time about the intricacies of the social system, but liked him and was both interested and amused.	Amory spread the table of their future friendship with all his ideas of what college should and did mean. Kerry, not inclined as yet to take things seriously, chided him gently for being curious at this inopportune time about the intricacies of the social system, but liked him and was both interested and amused. Burne, fair-haired, silent, and intent, appeared in the house only as a busy apparition, gliding in quietly at night and off again in the early morning to get up his work in the library—he was out for the Princetonian, competing furiously against forty others for the coveted first place.	not yet ready to be serious, teased him lightly for being curious at the wrong time about the complex social scene, but liked him and was interested and entertained.

this inopportune time	Amory spread the table of their future friendship with all his ideas of what college should and did mean. Kerry, not inclined as yet to take things seriously, chided him gently for being curious at this inopportune time about the intricacies of the social system, but liked him and was both interested and amused. Burne, fair-haired, silent, and intent, appeared in the house only as a busy apparition, gliding in quietly at night and off again in the early morning to get up his work in the library—he was out for the Princetonian, competing furiously against forty others for the coveted first place.	this bad time

gliding in quietly at night and off again in the early morning to get up his work in the library—he was out for the Princetonian, competing furiously against forty others for the coveted first place.	Kerry, not inclined as yet to take things seriously, chided him gently for being curious at this inopportune time about the intricacies of the social system, but liked him and was both interested and amused. Burne, fair-haired, silent, and intent, appeared in the house only as a busy apparition, gliding in quietly at night and off again in the early morning to get up his work in the library—he was out for the Princetonian, competing furiously against forty others for the coveted first place. In December he came down with diphtheria, and someone else won the competition, but, returning to college in February, he dauntlessly went after the prize again.	quietly slipping in at night and leaving early in the morning to work in the library—he was trying to get a top position at the Princetonian, fiercely competing against forty others.

the coveted first place	Kerry, not inclined as yet to take things seriously, chided him gently for being curious at this inopportune time about the intricacies of the social system, but liked him and was both interested and amused. Burne, fair-haired, silent, and intent, appeared in the house only as a busy apparition, gliding in quietly at night and off again in the early morning to get up his work in the library—he was out for the Princetonian, competing furiously against forty others for the coveted first place. In December he came down with diphtheria, and someone else won the competition, but, returning to college in February, he dauntlessly went after the prize again.	the prize

a busy apparition	Kerry, not inclined as yet to take things seriously, chided him gently for being curious at this inopportune time about the intricacies of the social system, but liked him and was both interested and amused. Burne, fair-haired, silent, and intent, appeared in the house only as a busy apparition, gliding in quietly at night and off again in the early morning to get up his work in the library—he was out for the Princetonian, competing furiously against forty others for the coveted first place. In December he came down with diphtheria, and someone else won the competition, but, returning to college in February, he dauntlessly went after the prize again.	always busy

won the competition, but, returning to college in February, he dauntlessly went after the prize again.	Burne, fair-haired, silent, and intent, appeared in the house only as a busy apparition, gliding in quietly at night and off again in the early morning to get up his work in the library—he was out for the Princetonian, competing furiously against forty others for the coveted first place. In December he came down with diphtheria, and someone else won the competition, but, returning to college in February, he dauntlessly went after the prize again. Necessarily, Amory’s acquaintance with him was in the way of three-minute chats, walking to and from lectures, so he failed to penetrate Burne’s one absorbing interest and find what lay beneath it.	won, but when he came back to college in February, he bravely tried for the prize again.

Amory’s acquaintance	In December he came down with diphtheria, and someone else won the competition, but, returning to college in February, he dauntlessly went after the prize again. Necessarily, Amory’s acquaintance with him was in the way of three-minute chats, walking to and from lectures, so he failed to penetrate Burne’s one absorbing interest and find what lay beneath it. Amory was far from contented.	Amory knew him

acquaintance with him was in the way of three-minute chats, walking to and from lectures, so he failed to penetrate Burne’s one absorbing interest and find what lay beneath it.	In December he came down with diphtheria, and someone else won the competition, but, returning to college in February, he dauntlessly went after the prize again. Necessarily, Amory’s acquaintance with him was in the way of three-minute chats, walking to and from lectures, so he failed to penetrate Burne’s one absorbing interest and find what lay beneath it. Amory was far from contented.	knew him only through brief chats while walking to classes, so he couldn't understand Burne's main passion or what motivated him.

Burne’s one absorbing interest	In December he came down with diphtheria, and someone else won the competition, but, returning to college in February, he dauntlessly went after the prize again. Necessarily, Amory’s acquaintance with him was in the way of three-minute chats, walking to and from lectures, so he failed to penetrate Burne’s one absorbing interest and find what lay beneath it. Amory was far from contented.	What Burne really cared about

was far from contented.	Necessarily, Amory’s acquaintance with him was in the way of three-minute chats, walking to and from lectures, so he failed to penetrate Burne’s one absorbing interest and find what lay beneath it. Amory was far from contented. He missed the place he had won at St. Regis’, the being known and admired, yet Princeton stimulated him, and there were many things ahead calculated to arouse the Machiavelli latent in him,	was not happy.

missed the place he had won at St. Regis’, the being known and admired, yet Princeton stimulated him, and there were many things ahead calculated to arouse the Machiavelli latent in him,	Amory was far from contented. He missed the place he had won at St. Regis’, the being known and admired, yet Princeton stimulated him, and there were many things ahead calculated to arouse the Machiavelli latent in him, could he but insert a wedge.	He missed being important and admired at St. Regis', but Princeton excited him, and he saw opportunities to use his cunning side.

a reluctant graduate	could he but insert a wedge. The upper-class clubs, concerning which he had pumped a reluctant graduate during the previous summer, excited his curiosity: Ivy, detached and breathlessly aristocratic; Cottage, an impressive mélange of brilliant adventurers and well-dressed philanderers; Tiger Inn, broad-shouldered and athletic, vitalized by an honest elaboration of prep-school standards; Cap and Gown, anti-alcoholic, faintly religious and politically powerful; flamboyant Colonial; literary Quadrangle; and the dozen others, varying in age and position. Anything which brought an under classman into too glaring a light was labelled with the damning brand of “running it out.”	an unwilling graduate

flamboyant Colonial	could he but insert a wedge. The upper-class clubs, concerning which he had pumped a reluctant graduate during the previous summer, excited his curiosity: Ivy, detached and breathlessly aristocratic; Cottage, an impressive mélange of brilliant adventurers and well-dressed philanderers; Tiger Inn, broad-shouldered and athletic, vitalized by an honest elaboration of prep-school standards; Cap and Gown, anti-alcoholic, faintly religious and politically powerful; flamboyant Colonial; literary Quadrangle; and the dozen others, varying in age and position. Anything which brought an under classman into too glaring a light was labelled with the damning brand of “running it out.”	flashy Colonial

brilliant adventurers	could he but insert a wedge. The upper-class clubs, concerning which he had pumped a reluctant graduate during the previous summer, excited his curiosity: Ivy, detached and breathlessly aristocratic; Cottage, an impressive mélange of brilliant adventurers and well-dressed philanderers; Tiger Inn, broad-shouldered and athletic, vitalized by an honest elaboration of prep-school standards; Cap and Gown, anti-alcoholic, faintly religious and politically powerful; flamboyant Colonial; literary Quadrangle; and the dozen others, varying in age and position. Anything which brought an under classman into too glaring a light was labelled with the damning brand of “running it out.”	smart and daring people

an honest elaboration	could he but insert a wedge. The upper-class clubs, concerning which he had pumped a reluctant graduate during the previous summer, excited his curiosity: Ivy, detached and breathlessly aristocratic; Cottage, an impressive mélange of brilliant adventurers and well-dressed philanderers; Tiger Inn, broad-shouldered and athletic, vitalized by an honest elaboration of prep-school standards; Cap and Gown, anti-alcoholic, faintly religious and politically powerful; flamboyant Colonial; literary Quadrangle; and the dozen others, varying in age and position. Anything which brought an under classman into too glaring a light was labelled with the damning brand of “running it out.”	a straightforward extension

well-dressed philanderers	could he but insert a wedge. The upper-class clubs, concerning which he had pumped a reluctant graduate during the previous summer, excited his curiosity: Ivy, detached and breathlessly aristocratic; Cottage, an impressive mélange of brilliant adventurers and well-dressed philanderers; Tiger Inn, broad-shouldered and athletic, vitalized by an honest elaboration of prep-school standards; Cap and Gown, anti-alcoholic, faintly religious and politically powerful; flamboyant Colonial; literary Quadrangle; and the dozen others, varying in age and position. Anything which brought an under classman into too glaring a light was labelled with the damning brand of “running it out.”	well-dressed womanizers

literary Quadrangle	could he but insert a wedge. The upper-class clubs, concerning which he had pumped a reluctant graduate during the previous summer, excited his curiosity: Ivy, detached and breathlessly aristocratic; Cottage, an impressive mélange of brilliant adventurers and well-dressed philanderers; Tiger Inn, broad-shouldered and athletic, vitalized by an honest elaboration of prep-school standards; Cap and Gown, anti-alcoholic, faintly religious and politically powerful; flamboyant Colonial; literary Quadrangle; and the dozen others, varying in age and position. Anything which brought an under classman into too glaring a light was labelled with the damning brand of “running it out.”	Literary Quadrangle

elaboration of prep-school standards; Cap and Gown, anti-alcoholic, faintly religious and politically powerful; flamboyant Colonial; literary Quadrangle; and the dozen others, varying in age and position.	could he but insert a wedge. The upper-class clubs, concerning which he had pumped a reluctant graduate during the previous summer, excited his curiosity: Ivy, detached and breathlessly aristocratic; Cottage, an impressive mélange of brilliant adventurers and well-dressed philanderers; Tiger Inn, broad-shouldered and athletic, vitalized by an honest elaboration of prep-school standards; Cap and Gown, anti-alcoholic, faintly religious and politically powerful; flamboyant Colonial; literary Quadrangle; and the dozen others, varying in age and position. Anything which brought an under classman into too glaring a light was labelled with the damning brand of “running it out.”	development of private school values; Cap and Gown, against alcohol, somewhat religious, and politically influential; showy Colonial; bookish Quadrangle; and a dozen other clubs, all different in age and importance.

an impressive mélange	could he but insert a wedge. The upper-class clubs, concerning which he had pumped a reluctant graduate during the previous summer, excited his curiosity: Ivy, detached and breathlessly aristocratic; Cottage, an impressive mélange of brilliant adventurers and well-dressed philanderers; Tiger Inn, broad-shouldered and athletic, vitalized by an honest elaboration of prep-school standards; Cap and Gown, anti-alcoholic, faintly religious and politically powerful; flamboyant Colonial; literary Quadrangle; and the dozen others, varying in age and position. Anything which brought an under classman into too glaring a light was labelled with the damning brand of “running it out.”	an impressive mix

brought an under classman into too glaring a light was labelled with the damning brand of “running it out.”	The upper-class clubs, concerning which he had pumped a reluctant graduate during the previous summer, excited his curiosity: Ivy, detached and breathlessly aristocratic; Cottage, an impressive mélange of brilliant adventurers and well-dressed philanderers; Tiger Inn, broad-shouldered and athletic, vitalized by an honest elaboration of prep-school standards; Cap and Gown, anti-alcoholic, faintly religious and politically powerful; flamboyant Colonial; literary Quadrangle; and the dozen others, varying in age and position. Anything which brought an under classman into too glaring a light was labelled with the damning brand of “running it out.” The movies thrived on caustic comments, but the men who made them were generally running it out; talking of clubs was running it out; standing for anything very strongly, as, for instance, drinking parties or teetotalling, was running it out; in short, being personally conspicuous was not tolerated, and the influential man was the noncommittal man, until at club elections in sophomore year everyone should be sewed up in some bag for the rest of his college career.	made a freshman too noticeable was considered desperate or trying too hard.

too glaring a light	The upper-class clubs, concerning which he had pumped a reluctant graduate during the previous summer, excited his curiosity: Ivy, detached and breathlessly aristocratic; Cottage, an impressive mélange of brilliant adventurers and well-dressed philanderers; Tiger Inn, broad-shouldered and athletic, vitalized by an honest elaboration of prep-school standards; Cap and Gown, anti-alcoholic, faintly religious and politically powerful; flamboyant Colonial; literary Quadrangle; and the dozen others, varying in age and position. Anything which brought an under classman into too glaring a light was labelled with the damning brand of “running it out.” The movies thrived on caustic comments, but the men who made them were generally running it out; talking of clubs was running it out; standing for anything very strongly, as, for instance, drinking parties or teetotalling, was running it out; in short, being personally conspicuous was not tolerated, and the influential man was the noncommittal man, until at club elections in sophomore year everyone should be sewed up in some bag for the rest of his college career.	too much attention

an under classman	The upper-class clubs, concerning which he had pumped a reluctant graduate during the previous summer, excited his curiosity: Ivy, detached and breathlessly aristocratic; Cottage, an impressive mélange of brilliant adventurers and well-dressed philanderers; Tiger Inn, broad-shouldered and athletic, vitalized by an honest elaboration of prep-school standards; Cap and Gown, anti-alcoholic, faintly religious and politically powerful; flamboyant Colonial; literary Quadrangle; and the dozen others, varying in age and position. Anything which brought an under classman into too glaring a light was labelled with the damning brand of “running it out.” The movies thrived on caustic comments, but the men who made them were generally running it out; talking of clubs was running it out; standing for anything very strongly, as, for instance, drinking parties or teetotalling, was running it out; in short, being personally conspicuous was not tolerated, and the influential man was the noncommittal man, until at club elections in sophomore year everyone should be sewed up in some bag for the rest of his college career.	a lower classman

the damning brand	The upper-class clubs, concerning which he had pumped a reluctant graduate during the previous summer, excited his curiosity: Ivy, detached and breathlessly aristocratic; Cottage, an impressive mélange of brilliant adventurers and well-dressed philanderers; Tiger Inn, broad-shouldered and athletic, vitalized by an honest elaboration of prep-school standards; Cap and Gown, anti-alcoholic, faintly religious and politically powerful; flamboyant Colonial; literary Quadrangle; and the dozen others, varying in age and position. Anything which brought an under classman into too glaring a light was labelled with the damning brand of “running it out.” The movies thrived on caustic comments, but the men who made them were generally running it out; talking of clubs was running it out; standing for anything very strongly, as, for instance, drinking parties or teetotalling, was running it out; in short, being personally conspicuous was not tolerated, and the influential man was the noncommittal man, until at club elections in sophomore year everyone should be sewed up in some bag for the rest of his college career.	something that would ruin your reputation

sophomore year	Anything which brought an under classman into too glaring a light was labelled with the damning brand of “running it out.” The movies thrived on caustic comments, but the men who made them were generally running it out; talking of clubs was running it out; standing for anything very strongly, as, for instance, drinking parties or teetotalling, was running it out; in short, being personally conspicuous was not tolerated, and the influential man was the noncommittal man, until at club elections in sophomore year everyone should be sewed up in some bag for the rest of his college career. Amory found that writing for the Nassau Literary Magazine would get him nothing, but that being on the board of the Daily Princetonian would get anyone a good deal.	second year of college

until at club elections in sophomore year everyone should be sewed up in some bag for the rest of his college career.	Anything which brought an under classman into too glaring a light was labelled with the damning brand of “running it out.” The movies thrived on caustic comments, but the men who made them were generally running it out; talking of clubs was running it out; standing for anything very strongly, as, for instance, drinking parties or teetotalling, was running it out; in short, being personally conspicuous was not tolerated, and the influential man was the noncommittal man, until at club elections in sophomore year everyone should be sewed up in some bag for the rest of his college career. Amory found that writing for the Nassau Literary Magazine would get him nothing, but that being on the board of the Daily Princetonian would get anyone a good deal.	until everyone was committed to a particular social group for the remainder of their time in college during the club selection process in their second year.

the noncommittal man	Anything which brought an under classman into too glaring a light was labelled with the damning brand of “running it out.” The movies thrived on caustic comments, but the men who made them were generally running it out; talking of clubs was running it out; standing for anything very strongly, as, for instance, drinking parties or teetotalling, was running it out; in short, being personally conspicuous was not tolerated, and the influential man was the noncommittal man, until at club elections in sophomore year everyone should be sewed up in some bag for the rest of his college career. Amory found that writing for the Nassau Literary Magazine would get him nothing, but that being on the board of the Daily Princetonian would get anyone a good deal.	Someone who doesn't take a strong position.

caustic comments	Anything which brought an under classman into too glaring a light was labelled with the damning brand of “running it out.” The movies thrived on caustic comments, but the men who made them were generally running it out; talking of clubs was running it out; standing for anything very strongly, as, for instance, drinking parties or teetotalling, was running it out; in short, being personally conspicuous was not tolerated, and the influential man was the noncommittal man, until at club elections in sophomore year everyone should be sewed up in some bag for the rest of his college career. Amory found that writing for the Nassau Literary Magazine would get him nothing, but that being on the board of the Daily Princetonian would get anyone a good deal.	harsh criticisms

the influential man	Anything which brought an under classman into too glaring a light was labelled with the damning brand of “running it out.” The movies thrived on caustic comments, but the men who made them were generally running it out; talking of clubs was running it out; standing for anything very strongly, as, for instance, drinking parties or teetotalling, was running it out; in short, being personally conspicuous was not tolerated, and the influential man was the noncommittal man, until at club elections in sophomore year everyone should be sewed up in some bag for the rest of his college career. Amory found that writing for the Nassau Literary Magazine would get him nothing, but that being on the board of the Daily Princetonian would get anyone a good deal.	the person with influence

board of the Daily Princetonian would get anyone a good deal.	The movies thrived on caustic comments, but the men who made them were generally running it out; talking of clubs was running it out; standing for anything very strongly, as, for instance, drinking parties or teetotalling, was running it out; in short, being personally conspicuous was not tolerated, and the influential man was the noncommittal man, until at club elections in sophomore year everyone should be sewed up in some bag for the rest of his college career. Amory found that writing for the Nassau Literary Magazine would get him nothing, but that being on the board of the Daily Princetonian would get anyone a good deal. His vague desire to do immortal acting with the English Dramatic Association faded out when he found that the most ingenious brains and talents were concentrated upon the Triangle Club, a musical comedy organization that every year took a great Christmas trip.	Being on the Daily Princetonian newspaper staff was a big advantage.

the Nassau Literary Magazine	The movies thrived on caustic comments, but the men who made them were generally running it out; talking of clubs was running it out; standing for anything very strongly, as, for instance, drinking parties or teetotalling, was running it out; in short, being personally conspicuous was not tolerated, and the influential man was the noncommittal man, until at club elections in sophomore year everyone should be sewed up in some bag for the rest of his college career. Amory found that writing for the Nassau Literary Magazine would get him nothing, but that being on the board of the Daily Princetonian would get anyone a good deal. His vague desire to do immortal acting with the English Dramatic Association faded out when he found that the most ingenious brains and talents were concentrated upon the Triangle Club, a musical comedy organization that every year took a great Christmas trip.	the college literary magazine

the Daily Princetonian	The movies thrived on caustic comments, but the men who made them were generally running it out; talking of clubs was running it out; standing for anything very strongly, as, for instance, drinking parties or teetotalling, was running it out; in short, being personally conspicuous was not tolerated, and the influential man was the noncommittal man, until at club elections in sophomore year everyone should be sewed up in some bag for the rest of his college career. Amory found that writing for the Nassau Literary Magazine would get him nothing, but that being on the board of the Daily Princetonian would get anyone a good deal. His vague desire to do immortal acting with the English Dramatic Association faded out when he found that the most ingenious brains and talents were concentrated upon the Triangle Club, a musical comedy organization that every year took a great Christmas trip.	the college newspaper

His vague desire	Amory found that writing for the Nassau Literary Magazine would get him nothing, but that being on the board of the Daily Princetonian would get anyone a good deal. His vague desire to do immortal acting with the English Dramatic Association faded out when he found that the most ingenious brains and talents were concentrated upon the Triangle Club, a musical comedy organization that every year took a great Christmas trip. In the meanwhile, feeling strangely alone and restless in Commons, with new desires and ambitions stirring in his mind, he let the first term go by between an envy of the embryo successes and a puzzled fretting with Kerry as to why they were not accepted immediately among the elite of the class.	His unfocused wish

the most ingenious brains	Amory found that writing for the Nassau Literary Magazine would get him nothing, but that being on the board of the Daily Princetonian would get anyone a good deal. His vague desire to do immortal acting with the English Dramatic Association faded out when he found that the most ingenious brains and talents were concentrated upon the Triangle Club, a musical comedy organization that every year took a great Christmas trip. In the meanwhile, feeling strangely alone and restless in Commons, with new desires and ambitions stirring in his mind, he let the first term go by between an envy of the embryo successes and a puzzled fretting with Kerry as to why they were not accepted immediately among the elite of the class.	the smartest people

faded out when he found that the most ingenious brains and talents were concentrated upon the Triangle Club, a musical comedy organization that every year took a great Christmas trip.	Amory found that writing for the Nassau Literary Magazine would get him nothing, but that being on the board of the Daily Princetonian would get anyone a good deal. His vague desire to do immortal acting with the English Dramatic Association faded out when he found that the most ingenious brains and talents were concentrated upon the Triangle Club, a musical comedy organization that every year took a great Christmas trip. In the meanwhile, feeling strangely alone and restless in Commons, with new desires and ambitions stirring in his mind, he let the first term go by between an envy of the embryo successes and a puzzled fretting with Kerry as to why they were not accepted immediately among the elite of the class.	disappeared when he realized the smartest and most talented people were all involved in the Triangle Club, a musical comedy group that went on a big trip every Christmas.

the embryo successes	His vague desire to do immortal acting with the English Dramatic Association faded out when he found that the most ingenious brains and talents were concentrated upon the Triangle Club, a musical comedy organization that every year took a great Christmas trip. In the meanwhile, feeling strangely alone and restless in Commons, with new desires and ambitions stirring in his mind, he let the first term go by between an envy of the embryo successes and a puzzled fretting with Kerry as to why they were not accepted immediately among the elite of the class. Many afternoons they lounged in the windows of 12 Univee and watched the class pass to and from Commons, noting satellites already attaching themselves to the more prominent, watching the lonely grind with his hurried step and downcast eye, envying the happy security of the big school groups.	the up-and-coming popular people

the lonely grind	In the meanwhile, feeling strangely alone and restless in Commons, with new desires and ambitions stirring in his mind, he let the first term go by between an envy of the embryo successes and a puzzled fretting with Kerry as to why they were not accepted immediately among the elite of the class. Many afternoons they lounged in the windows of 12 Univee and watched the class pass to and from Commons, noting satellites already attaching themselves to the more prominent, watching the lonely grind with his hurried step and downcast eye, envying the happy security of the big school groups. “We’re the damned middle class, that’s what!”	the hardworking student who is alone

12 Univee	In the meanwhile, feeling strangely alone and restless in Commons, with new desires and ambitions stirring in his mind, he let the first term go by between an envy of the embryo successes and a puzzled fretting with Kerry as to why they were not accepted immediately among the elite of the class. Many afternoons they lounged in the windows of 12 Univee and watched the class pass to and from Commons, noting satellites already attaching themselves to the more prominent, watching the lonely grind with his hurried step and downcast eye, envying the happy security of the big school groups. “We’re the damned middle class, that’s what!”	12 Univee

security of the big school groups.	In the meanwhile, feeling strangely alone and restless in Commons, with new desires and ambitions stirring in his mind, he let the first term go by between an envy of the embryo successes and a puzzled fretting with Kerry as to why they were not accepted immediately among the elite of the class. Many afternoons they lounged in the windows of 12 Univee and watched the class pass to and from Commons, noting satellites already attaching themselves to the more prominent, watching the lonely grind with his hurried step and downcast eye, envying the happy security of the big school groups. “We’re the damned middle class, that’s what!”	feeling safe within the popular groups.

downcast eye	In the meanwhile, feeling strangely alone and restless in Commons, with new desires and ambitions stirring in his mind, he let the first term go by between an envy of the embryo successes and a puzzled fretting with Kerry as to why they were not accepted immediately among the elite of the class. Many afternoons they lounged in the windows of 12 Univee and watched the class pass to and from Commons, noting satellites already attaching themselves to the more prominent, watching the lonely grind with his hurried step and downcast eye, envying the happy security of the big school groups. “We’re the damned middle class, that’s what!”	sad look

his hurried step	In the meanwhile, feeling strangely alone and restless in Commons, with new desires and ambitions stirring in his mind, he let the first term go by between an envy of the embryo successes and a puzzled fretting with Kerry as to why they were not accepted immediately among the elite of the class. Many afternoons they lounged in the windows of 12 Univee and watched the class pass to and from Commons, noting satellites already attaching themselves to the more prominent, watching the lonely grind with his hurried step and downcast eye, envying the happy security of the big school groups. “We’re the damned middle class, that’s what!”	his quick walk

the damned middle class	Many afternoons they lounged in the windows of 12 Univee and watched the class pass to and from Commons, noting satellites already attaching themselves to the more prominent, watching the lonely grind with his hurried step and downcast eye, envying the happy security of the big school groups. “We’re the damned middle class, that’s what!” he complained to Kerry one day as he lay stretched out on the sofa, consuming a family of Fatimas with contemplative precision.	the cursed middle class

contemplative precision	“We’re the damned middle class, that’s what!” he complained to Kerry one day as he lay stretched out on the sofa, consuming a family of Fatimas with contemplative precision. “Well, why not?	thoughtful care

complained to Kerry one day as he lay stretched out on the sofa, consuming a family of Fatimas with contemplative precision.	“We’re the damned middle class, that’s what!” he complained to Kerry one day as he lay stretched out on the sofa, consuming a family of Fatimas with contemplative precision. “Well, why not?	complained to Kerry one day while lying on the sofa, smoking a pack of cigarettes slowly and thoughtfully.

have it on ’em, more self-confidence, dress better, cut a swathe—” “Oh, it isn’t that I mind the glittering caste system,” admitted Amory.	“Well, why not? We came to Princeton so we could feel that way toward the small colleges—have it on ’em, more self-confidence, dress better, cut a swathe—” “Oh, it isn’t that I mind the glittering caste system,” admitted Amory. “I like having a bunch of hot cats on top, but gosh, Kerry, I’ve got to be one of them.”	be better than them, be more confident, dress better, and make a splash." "Oh, it's not that I dislike the glamorous social hierarchy," admitted Amory.

the glittering caste system	“Well, why not? We came to Princeton so we could feel that way toward the small colleges—have it on ’em, more self-confidence, dress better, cut a swathe—” “Oh, it isn’t that I mind the glittering caste system,” admitted Amory. “I like having a bunch of hot cats on top, but gosh, Kerry, I’ve got to be one of them.”	the group of popular, rich people

only a sweaty bourgeois	“I like having a bunch of hot cats on top, but gosh, Kerry, I’ve got to be one of them.” “But just now, Amory, you’re only a sweaty bourgeois.” Amory lay for a moment without speaking.	just a sweaty middle-class person

get anywhere by working for it.	“I won’t be—long,” he said finally. “But I hate to get anywhere by working for it. I’ll show the marks, don’t you know.”	succeed by actually working.

“Honorable scars	I’ll show the marks, don’t you know.” “Honorable scars.” Kerry craned his neck suddenly at the street.	Honorable scars.

craned his neck suddenly at the street.	“Honorable scars.” Kerry craned his neck suddenly at the street. “There’s Langueduc, if you want to see what he looks like—and Humbird just behind.”	stretched his neck to look at the street.

want to see what he looks like—and Humbird just behind.”	Kerry craned his neck suddenly at the street. “There’s Langueduc, if you want to see what he looks like—and Humbird just behind.” Amory rose dynamically and sought the windows.	want to see what he looks like—and Humbird is right behind him.

the rugged type	Amory rose dynamically and sought the windows. “Oh,” he said, scrutinizing these worthies, “Humbird looks like a knockout, but this Langueduc—he’s the rugged type, isn’t he? I distrust that sort.	a tough guy

looks like a knockout, but this Langueduc—he’s the rugged type, isn’t he?	Amory rose dynamically and sought the windows. “Oh,” he said, scrutinizing these worthies, “Humbird looks like a knockout, but this Langueduc—he’s the rugged type, isn’t he? I distrust that sort.	Humbird looks great, but Langueduc seems like the tough type, right?

subsided, “you’re a literary genius.	All diamonds look big in the rough.” “Well,” said Kerry, as the excitement subsided, “you’re a literary genius. It’s up to you.”	subsided, "you're a literary genius."

’s up to you.”	“Well,” said Kerry, as the excitement subsided, “you’re a literary genius. It’s up to you.” “I wonder”—Amory paused—“if	It's your decision.

say it to anybody except you.”	I honestly think so sometimes. That sounds like the devil, and I wouldn’t say it to anybody except you.” “Well—go ahead.	say it to anyone but you.

poems like this guy D’Invilliers in the Lit.”	“Well—go ahead. Let your hair grow and write poems like this guy D’Invilliers in the Lit.” Amory reached lazily at a pile of magazines on the table.	poems like the ones written by this D'Invilliers guy in the literary magazine.

this guy D’Invilliers	“Well—go ahead. Let your hair grow and write poems like this guy D’Invilliers in the Lit.” Amory reached lazily at a pile of magazines on the table.	this D'Invilliers guy

pile of magazines on the table.	Let your hair grow and write poems like this guy D’Invilliers in the Lit.” Amory reached lazily at a pile of magazines on the table. “Read his latest effort?”	magazines on the table.

said in surprise, “he’s a freshman, isn’t he?”	“Hello!” he said in surprise, “he’s a freshman, isn’t he?” “Yeah.”	said in surprise, "he's a freshman, right?"

tapers, prisoned in their silver frames, Wave their thin flames like shadows in the wind, Pia, Pompia, come—come away—’ “Now, what the devil does that mean?”	My God! “ ‘A serving lady speaks: Black velvet trails its folds over the day, White tapers, prisoned in their silver frames, Wave their thin flames like shadows in the wind, Pia, Pompia, come—come away—’ “Now, what the devil does that mean?” “It’s a pantry scene.”	Candles, held in their silver holders, flicker like shadows in the wind. Pia, Pompia, come—come away—What does that even mean?

a pantry scene	“ ‘A serving lady speaks: Black velvet trails its folds over the day, White tapers, prisoned in their silver frames, Wave their thin flames like shadows in the wind, Pia, Pompia, come—come away—’ “Now, what the devil does that mean?” “It’s a pantry scene.” “ ‘Her toes are stiffened like a stork’s in flight; She’s laid upon her bed, on the white sheets, Her hands pressed on her smooth bust like a saint, Bella Cunizza, come into the light!’	A scene in the pantry.

her smooth bust	“It’s a pantry scene.” “ ‘Her toes are stiffened like a stork’s in flight; She’s laid upon her bed, on the white sheets, Her hands pressed on her smooth bust like a saint, Bella Cunizza, come into the light!’ “My gosh, Kerry, what in hell is it all about?	her smooth breasts

a stork’s	“It’s a pantry scene.” “ ‘Her toes are stiffened like a stork’s in flight; She’s laid upon her bed, on the white sheets, Her hands pressed on her smooth bust like a saint, Bella Cunizza, come into the light!’ “My gosh, Kerry, what in hell is it all about?	a stork's

gosh, Kerry, what in hell is it all about?	“ ‘Her toes are stiffened like a stork’s in flight; She’s laid upon her bed, on the white sheets, Her hands pressed on her smooth bust like a saint, Bella Cunizza, come into the light!’ “My gosh, Kerry, what in hell is it all about? I swear I don’t get him at all, and I’m a literary bird myself.”	Kerry, what the heck is going on?

got to think of hearses and stale milk when you read it.	I swear I don’t get him at all, and I’m a literary bird myself.” “It’s pretty tricky,” said Kerry, “only you’ve got to think of hearses and stale milk when you read it. That isn’t as pash as some of them.”	You need to think of funerals and old, sour milk when you read it.

stale milk	I swear I don’t get him at all, and I’m a literary bird myself.” “It’s pretty tricky,” said Kerry, “only you’ve got to think of hearses and stale milk when you read it. That isn’t as pash as some of them.”	stale milk

tossed the magazine on the table.	That isn’t as pash as some of them.” Amory tossed the magazine on the table. “Well,” he sighed, “I sure am up in the air.	threw the magazine on the table.

thumb my nose at the Golden Treasury and be a Princeton slicker.”	I know I’m not a regular fellow, yet I loathe anybody else that isn’t. I can’t decide whether to cultivate my mind and be a great dramatist, or to thumb my nose at the Golden Treasury and be a Princeton slicker.” “Why decide?” suggested Kerry.	disregard classic literature and become a preppy, popular student.”

a Princeton slicker	I know I’m not a regular fellow, yet I loathe anybody else that isn’t. I can’t decide whether to cultivate my mind and be a great dramatist, or to thumb my nose at the Golden Treasury and be a Princeton slicker.” “Why decide?” suggested Kerry.	a preppy, popular student at Princeton

a great dramatist	I know I’m not a regular fellow, yet I loathe anybody else that isn’t. I can’t decide whether to cultivate my mind and be a great dramatist, or to thumb my nose at the Golden Treasury and be a Princeton slicker.” “Why decide?” suggested Kerry.	a successful playwright

“Better drift	“Why decide?” suggested Kerry. “Better drift, like me. I’m going to sail into prominence on Burne’s coattails.”	Better to drift

drift, like me.	“Why decide?” suggested Kerry. “Better drift, like me. I’m going to sail into prominence on Burne’s coattails.”	Float along, like I do.

sail into prominence on Burne’s coattails.”	“Better drift, like me. I’m going to sail into prominence on Burne’s coattails.” “I can’t drift—I want to be interested.	become successful by using Burne's success.

Burne’s coattails	“Better drift, like me. I’m going to sail into prominence on Burne’s coattails.” “I can’t drift—I want to be interested.	Riding Burne's success.

Princetonian chairman	“I can’t drift—I want to be interested. I want to pull strings, even for somebody else, or be Princetonian chairman or Triangle president. I want to be admired, Kerry.”	Head of the Princeton newspaper.

pull strings, even for somebody else, or be Princetonian chairman or Triangle president.	“I can’t drift—I want to be interested. I want to pull strings, even for somebody else, or be Princetonian chairman or Triangle president. I want to be admired, Kerry.”	use my influence, even for someone else, or be the head of a Princeton club or the Triangle Club.

mix around the class right now, when it’s fun to be a snob.	“No. I’m thinking about you, too. We’ve got to get out and mix around the class right now, when it’s fun to be a snob. I’d like to bring a sardine to the prom in June, for instance, but I wouldn’t do it unless I could be damn debonaire about it—introduce her to all the prize parlor-snakes, and the football captain, and all that simple stuff.”	mingle with everyone in class now, when it's fun to be a snob.

all the prize parlor-snakes	We’ve got to get out and mix around the class right now, when it’s fun to be a snob. I’d like to bring a sardine to the prom in June, for instance, but I wouldn’t do it unless I could be damn debonaire about it—introduce her to all the prize parlor-snakes, and the football captain, and all that simple stuff.” “Amory,” said Kerry impatiently, “you’re just going around in a circle.	all the stuck-up people

do it unless I could be damn debonaire about it—introduce her to all the prize parlor-snakes, and the football captain, and all that simple stuff.”	We’ve got to get out and mix around the class right now, when it’s fun to be a snob. I’d like to bring a sardine to the prom in June, for instance, but I wouldn’t do it unless I could be damn debonaire about it—introduce her to all the prize parlor-snakes, and the football captain, and all that simple stuff.” “Amory,” said Kerry impatiently, “you’re just going around in a circle.	do it unless I could be really charming about it—introduce her to all the stuck-up people, the football captain, and that kind of ordinary stuff.

going around in a circle.	I’d like to bring a sardine to the prom in June, for instance, but I wouldn’t do it unless I could be damn debonaire about it—introduce her to all the prize parlor-snakes, and the football captain, and all that simple stuff.” “Amory,” said Kerry impatiently, “you’re just going around in a circle. If you want to be prominent, get out and try for something; if you don’t, just take it easy.”	not getting anywhere.

don’t, just take it easy.”	“Amory,” said Kerry impatiently, “you’re just going around in a circle. If you want to be prominent, get out and try for something; if you don’t, just take it easy.” He yawned.	if you don't, just relax.

12 Univee	We’ll go down and watch football practice.” Amory gradually accepted this point of view, decided that next fall would inaugurate his career, and relinquished himself to watching Kerry extract joy from 12 Univee. They filled the Jewish youth’s bed with lemon pie; they put out the gas all over the house every night by blowing into the jet in Amory’s room, to the bewilderment of Mrs. Twelve and the local plumber; they set up the effects of the plebeian drunks—pictures, books, and furniture—in the bathroom, to the confusion of the pair, who hazily discovered the transposition on their return from a Trenton spree; they were disappointed beyond measure when the plebeian drunks decided to take it as a joke; they played red-dog and twenty-one and jackpot from dinner to dawn, and on the occasion of one man’s birthday persuaded him to buy sufficient champagne for a hilarious celebration.	Twelve University Place residents.

decided that next fall would inaugurate his career, and relinquished himself to watching Kerry extract joy from 12 Univee.	We’ll go down and watch football practice.” Amory gradually accepted this point of view, decided that next fall would inaugurate his career, and relinquished himself to watching Kerry extract joy from 12 Univee. They filled the Jewish youth’s bed with lemon pie; they put out the gas all over the house every night by blowing into the jet in Amory’s room, to the bewilderment of Mrs. Twelve and the local plumber; they set up the effects of the plebeian drunks—pictures, books, and furniture—in the bathroom, to the confusion of the pair, who hazily discovered the transposition on their return from a Trenton spree; they were disappointed beyond measure when the plebeian drunks decided to take it as a joke; they played red-dog and twenty-one and jackpot from dinner to dawn, and on the occasion of one man’s birthday persuaded him to buy sufficient champagne for a hilarious celebration.	decided to start his real life next fall and just watched Kerry have fun with 12 Univee in the meantime.

the local plumber	Amory gradually accepted this point of view, decided that next fall would inaugurate his career, and relinquished himself to watching Kerry extract joy from 12 Univee. They filled the Jewish youth’s bed with lemon pie; they put out the gas all over the house every night by blowing into the jet in Amory’s room, to the bewilderment of Mrs. Twelve and the local plumber; they set up the effects of the plebeian drunks—pictures, books, and furniture—in the bathroom, to the confusion of the pair, who hazily discovered the transposition on their return from a Trenton spree; they were disappointed beyond measure when the plebeian drunks decided to take it as a joke; they played red-dog and twenty-one and jackpot from dinner to dawn, and on the occasion of one man’s birthday persuaded him to buy sufficient champagne for a hilarious celebration. The donor of the party having remained sober, Kerry and Amory accidentally dropped him down two flights of stairs and called, shamefaced and penitent, at the infirmary all the following week.	the neighborhood plumber

one man’s birthday	Amory gradually accepted this point of view, decided that next fall would inaugurate his career, and relinquished himself to watching Kerry extract joy from 12 Univee. They filled the Jewish youth’s bed with lemon pie; they put out the gas all over the house every night by blowing into the jet in Amory’s room, to the bewilderment of Mrs. Twelve and the local plumber; they set up the effects of the plebeian drunks—pictures, books, and furniture—in the bathroom, to the confusion of the pair, who hazily discovered the transposition on their return from a Trenton spree; they were disappointed beyond measure when the plebeian drunks decided to take it as a joke; they played red-dog and twenty-one and jackpot from dinner to dawn, and on the occasion of one man’s birthday persuaded him to buy sufficient champagne for a hilarious celebration. The donor of the party having remained sober, Kerry and Amory accidentally dropped him down two flights of stairs and called, shamefaced and penitent, at the infirmary all the following week.	a guy's birthday

Amory’s room	Amory gradually accepted this point of view, decided that next fall would inaugurate his career, and relinquished himself to watching Kerry extract joy from 12 Univee. They filled the Jewish youth’s bed with lemon pie; they put out the gas all over the house every night by blowing into the jet in Amory’s room, to the bewilderment of Mrs. Twelve and the local plumber; they set up the effects of the plebeian drunks—pictures, books, and furniture—in the bathroom, to the confusion of the pair, who hazily discovered the transposition on their return from a Trenton spree; they were disappointed beyond measure when the plebeian drunks decided to take it as a joke; they played red-dog and twenty-one and jackpot from dinner to dawn, and on the occasion of one man’s birthday persuaded him to buy sufficient champagne for a hilarious celebration. The donor of the party having remained sober, Kerry and Amory accidentally dropped him down two flights of stairs and called, shamefaced and penitent, at the infirmary all the following week.	Amory's room.

the Jewish youth’s bed	Amory gradually accepted this point of view, decided that next fall would inaugurate his career, and relinquished himself to watching Kerry extract joy from 12 Univee. They filled the Jewish youth’s bed with lemon pie; they put out the gas all over the house every night by blowing into the jet in Amory’s room, to the bewilderment of Mrs. Twelve and the local plumber; they set up the effects of the plebeian drunks—pictures, books, and furniture—in the bathroom, to the confusion of the pair, who hazily discovered the transposition on their return from a Trenton spree; they were disappointed beyond measure when the plebeian drunks decided to take it as a joke; they played red-dog and twenty-one and jackpot from dinner to dawn, and on the occasion of one man’s birthday persuaded him to buy sufficient champagne for a hilarious celebration. The donor of the party having remained sober, Kerry and Amory accidentally dropped him down two flights of stairs and called, shamefaced and penitent, at the infirmary all the following week.	the Jewish boy's bed

a hilarious celebration	Amory gradually accepted this point of view, decided that next fall would inaugurate his career, and relinquished himself to watching Kerry extract joy from 12 Univee. They filled the Jewish youth’s bed with lemon pie; they put out the gas all over the house every night by blowing into the jet in Amory’s room, to the bewilderment of Mrs. Twelve and the local plumber; they set up the effects of the plebeian drunks—pictures, books, and furniture—in the bathroom, to the confusion of the pair, who hazily discovered the transposition on their return from a Trenton spree; they were disappointed beyond measure when the plebeian drunks decided to take it as a joke; they played red-dog and twenty-one and jackpot from dinner to dawn, and on the occasion of one man’s birthday persuaded him to buy sufficient champagne for a hilarious celebration. The donor of the party having remained sober, Kerry and Amory accidentally dropped him down two flights of stairs and called, shamefaced and penitent, at the infirmary all the following week.	a really fun party

drunks—pictures, books, and furniture—in the bathroom, to the confusion of the pair, who hazily discovered the transposition on their return from a Trenton spree; they were disappointed beyond measure when the plebeian drunks decided to take it as a joke; they played red-dog and twenty-one and jackpot from dinner to dawn, and on the occasion of one man’s birthday persuaded him to buy sufficient champagne for a hilarious celebration.	Amory gradually accepted this point of view, decided that next fall would inaugurate his career, and relinquished himself to watching Kerry extract joy from 12 Univee. They filled the Jewish youth’s bed with lemon pie; they put out the gas all over the house every night by blowing into the jet in Amory’s room, to the bewilderment of Mrs. Twelve and the local plumber; they set up the effects of the plebeian drunks—pictures, books, and furniture—in the bathroom, to the confusion of the pair, who hazily discovered the transposition on their return from a Trenton spree; they were disappointed beyond measure when the plebeian drunks decided to take it as a joke; they played red-dog and twenty-one and jackpot from dinner to dawn, and on the occasion of one man’s birthday persuaded him to buy sufficient champagne for a hilarious celebration. The donor of the party having remained sober, Kerry and Amory accidentally dropped him down two flights of stairs and called, shamefaced and penitent, at the infirmary all the following week.	They moved the drunks' belongings—pictures, books, and furniture—into the bathroom, confusing the couple, who drunkenly discovered the switch when they got back from a trip to Trenton; they were extremely disappointed when the drunks decided to laugh it off; they played cards all night, and for one man's birthday, they convinced him to buy enough champagne for a wild party.

the plebeian drunks	Amory gradually accepted this point of view, decided that next fall would inaugurate his career, and relinquished himself to watching Kerry extract joy from 12 Univee. They filled the Jewish youth’s bed with lemon pie; they put out the gas all over the house every night by blowing into the jet in Amory’s room, to the bewilderment of Mrs. Twelve and the local plumber; they set up the effects of the plebeian drunks—pictures, books, and furniture—in the bathroom, to the confusion of the pair, who hazily discovered the transposition on their return from a Trenton spree; they were disappointed beyond measure when the plebeian drunks decided to take it as a joke; they played red-dog and twenty-one and jackpot from dinner to dawn, and on the occasion of one man’s birthday persuaded him to buy sufficient champagne for a hilarious celebration. The donor of the party having remained sober, Kerry and Amory accidentally dropped him down two flights of stairs and called, shamefaced and penitent, at the infirmary all the following week.	the common drunks

a Trenton spree	Amory gradually accepted this point of view, decided that next fall would inaugurate his career, and relinquished himself to watching Kerry extract joy from 12 Univee. They filled the Jewish youth’s bed with lemon pie; they put out the gas all over the house every night by blowing into the jet in Amory’s room, to the bewilderment of Mrs. Twelve and the local plumber; they set up the effects of the plebeian drunks—pictures, books, and furniture—in the bathroom, to the confusion of the pair, who hazily discovered the transposition on their return from a Trenton spree; they were disappointed beyond measure when the plebeian drunks decided to take it as a joke; they played red-dog and twenty-one and jackpot from dinner to dawn, and on the occasion of one man’s birthday persuaded him to buy sufficient champagne for a hilarious celebration. The donor of the party having remained sober, Kerry and Amory accidentally dropped him down two flights of stairs and called, shamefaced and penitent, at the infirmary all the following week.	a drunken trip to Trenton

dropped him down two flights of stairs and called, shamefaced and penitent, at the infirmary all the following week.	They filled the Jewish youth’s bed with lemon pie; they put out the gas all over the house every night by blowing into the jet in Amory’s room, to the bewilderment of Mrs. Twelve and the local plumber; they set up the effects of the plebeian drunks—pictures, books, and furniture—in the bathroom, to the confusion of the pair, who hazily discovered the transposition on their return from a Trenton spree; they were disappointed beyond measure when the plebeian drunks decided to take it as a joke; they played red-dog and twenty-one and jackpot from dinner to dawn, and on the occasion of one man’s birthday persuaded him to buy sufficient champagne for a hilarious celebration. The donor of the party having remained sober, Kerry and Amory accidentally dropped him down two flights of stairs and called, shamefaced and penitent, at the infirmary all the following week. “Say, who are all these women?” demanded Kerry one day, protesting at the size of Amory’s mail.	accidentally pushed him down two flights of stairs and visited him at the hospital, feeling ashamed and sorry, for the entire next week.

Amory’s mail	The donor of the party having remained sober, Kerry and Amory accidentally dropped him down two flights of stairs and called, shamefaced and penitent, at the infirmary all the following week. “Say, who are all these women?” demanded Kerry one day, protesting at the size of Amory’s mail. “I’ve been looking at the postmarks lately—Farmington and Dobbs and Westover and Dana Hall—what’s the idea?”	Amory's letters

demanded Kerry one day, protesting at the size of Amory’s mail.	The donor of the party having remained sober, Kerry and Amory accidentally dropped him down two flights of stairs and called, shamefaced and penitent, at the infirmary all the following week. “Say, who are all these women?” demanded Kerry one day, protesting at the size of Amory’s mail. “I’ve been looking at the postmarks lately—Farmington and Dobbs and Westover and Dana Hall—what’s the idea?”	Kerry asked one day, complaining about how much mail Amory was getting.

looking at the postmarks lately—Farmington and Dobbs and Westover and Dana Hall—what’s the idea?”	“Say, who are all these women?” demanded Kerry one day, protesting at the size of Amory’s mail. “I’ve been looking at the postmarks lately—Farmington and Dobbs and Westover and Dana Hall—what’s the idea?” Amory grinned.	What's with all the letters from Farmington, Dobbs, Westover, and Dana Hall?

car of her own and that’s damn convenient; there’s Sally Weatherby—she’s getting too fat; there’s Myra St. Claire, she’s an old flame, easy to kiss if you like it—” “What line do you throw ’em?” demanded Kerry.	He named them off. “There’s Marylyn De Witt—she’s pretty, got a car of her own and that’s damn convenient; there’s Sally Weatherby—she’s getting too fat; there’s Myra St. Claire, she’s an old flame, easy to kiss if you like it—” “What line do you throw ’em?” demanded Kerry. “I’ve tried everything, and the mad wags aren’t even afraid of me.”	she has her own car, which is really handy; then there's Sally Weatherby—she's gaining weight; and Myra St. Claire, she's an ex, easy to kiss if you're into that." "What pickup line do you use?" Kerry asked.

the mad wags	“There’s Marylyn De Witt—she’s pretty, got a car of her own and that’s damn convenient; there’s Sally Weatherby—she’s getting too fat; there’s Myra St. Claire, she’s an old flame, easy to kiss if you like it—” “What line do you throw ’em?” demanded Kerry. “I’ve tried everything, and the mad wags aren’t even afraid of me.” “You’re the ‘nice boy’ type,” suggested Amory.	the crazy girls

is safe if she’s with me.	“That’s just it. Mother always feels the girl is safe if she’s with me. Honestly, it’s annoying.	is safe when she's with me.

start to hold somebody’s hand, they laugh at me, and let me, just as if it wasn’t part of them.	Honestly, it’s annoying. If I start to hold somebody’s hand, they laugh at me, and let me, just as if it wasn’t part of them. As soon as I get hold of a hand they sort of disconnect it from the rest of them.”	When I try to hold someone's hand, they laugh and let me, acting like their hand isn't even connected to them.

somebody’s hand	Honestly, it’s annoying. If I start to hold somebody’s hand, they laugh at me, and let me, just as if it wasn’t part of them. As soon as I get hold of a hand they sort of disconnect it from the rest of them.”	someone's hand

hold of a hand they sort of disconnect it from the rest of them.”	If I start to hold somebody’s hand, they laugh at me, and let me, just as if it wasn’t part of them. As soon as I get hold of a hand they sort of disconnect it from the rest of them.” “Sulk,” suggested Amory.	they detach that hand from the rest of their body.”

come back in half an hour—startle ’em.”	“Sulk,” suggested Amory. “Tell ’em you’re wild and have ’em reform you—go home furious—come back in half an hour—startle ’em.” Kerry shook his head.	Come back in half an hour and surprise them.

a St. Timothy girl	“No chance. I wrote a St. Timothy girl a really loving letter last year. In one place I got rattled and said: ‘My God, how I love you!’	A girl who goes to St. Timothy's school.

a nail scissors	In one place I got rattled and said: ‘My God, how I love you!’ She took a nail scissors, clipped out the ‘My God’ and showed the rest of the letter all over school. Doesn’t work at all.	nail scissors

rest of the letter all over school.	In one place I got rattled and said: ‘My God, how I love you!’ She took a nail scissors, clipped out the ‘My God’ and showed the rest of the letter all over school. Doesn’t work at all.	showed the rest of the letter to everyone at school.

good old Amory	I’m just ‘good old Kerry’ and all that rot.” Amory smiled and tried to picture himself as “good old Amory.” He failed completely.	Just plain Amory.

picture himself as “good old Amory.”	I’m just ‘good old Kerry’ and all that rot.” Amory smiled and tried to picture himself as “good old Amory.” He failed completely.	imagine himself as "good old Amory."

12 Univee	He failed completely. February dripped snow and rain, the cyclonic freshman mid-years passed, and life in 12 Univee continued interesting if not purposeful. Once a day Amory indulged in a club sandwich, cornflakes, and Julienne potatoes at Joe’s, accompanied usually by Kerry or Alec Connage.	12 University Avenue

life in 12 Univee continued interesting if not purposeful.	He failed completely. February dripped snow and rain, the cyclonic freshman mid-years passed, and life in 12 Univee continued interesting if not purposeful. Once a day Amory indulged in a club sandwich, cornflakes, and Julienne potatoes at Joe’s, accompanied usually by Kerry or Alec Connage.	Life at 12 Univee remained interesting, even if it lacked real direction.

day Amory indulged in a club sandwich, cornflakes, and Julienne potatoes at Joe’s, accompanied usually by Kerry or Alec Connage.	February dripped snow and rain, the cyclonic freshman mid-years passed, and life in 12 Univee continued interesting if not purposeful. Once a day Amory indulged in a club sandwich, cornflakes, and Julienne potatoes at Joe’s, accompanied usually by Kerry or Alec Connage. The latter was a quiet, rather aloof slicker from Hotchkiss, who lived next door and shared the same enforced singleness as Amory, due to the fact that his entire class had gone to Yale.	Every day, Amory treated himself to a club sandwich, cornflakes, and Julienne fries at Joe's, usually with Kerry or Alec Connage.

Julienne potatoes	February dripped snow and rain, the cyclonic freshman mid-years passed, and life in 12 Univee continued interesting if not purposeful. Once a day Amory indulged in a club sandwich, cornflakes, and Julienne potatoes at Joe’s, accompanied usually by Kerry or Alec Connage. The latter was a quiet, rather aloof slicker from Hotchkiss, who lived next door and shared the same enforced singleness as Amory, due to the fact that his entire class had gone to Yale.	thinly sliced potatoes

slicker from Hotchkiss, who lived next door and shared the same enforced singleness as Amory, due to the fact that his entire class had gone to Yale.	Once a day Amory indulged in a club sandwich, cornflakes, and Julienne potatoes at Joe’s, accompanied usually by Kerry or Alec Connage. The latter was a quiet, rather aloof slicker from Hotchkiss, who lived next door and shared the same enforced singleness as Amory, due to the fact that his entire class had gone to Yale. Joe’s was unaesthetic and faintly unsanitary, but a limitless charge account could be opened there, a convenience that Amory appreciated.	a smooth, reserved guy from Hotchkiss who lived next door and, like Amory, was also without a girlfriend because his whole class had gone to Yale.

the same enforced singleness	Once a day Amory indulged in a club sandwich, cornflakes, and Julienne potatoes at Joe’s, accompanied usually by Kerry or Alec Connage. The latter was a quiet, rather aloof slicker from Hotchkiss, who lived next door and shared the same enforced singleness as Amory, due to the fact that his entire class had gone to Yale. Joe’s was unaesthetic and faintly unsanitary, but a limitless charge account could be opened there, a convenience that Amory appreciated.	being in the same situation of not having girlfriends

a limitless charge account	The latter was a quiet, rather aloof slicker from Hotchkiss, who lived next door and shared the same enforced singleness as Amory, due to the fact that his entire class had gone to Yale. Joe’s was unaesthetic and faintly unsanitary, but a limitless charge account could be opened there, a convenience that Amory appreciated. His father had been experimenting with mining stocks and, in consequence, his allowance, while liberal, was not at all what he had expected.	an account where you could spend as much as you wanted

account could be opened there, a convenience that Amory appreciated.	The latter was a quiet, rather aloof slicker from Hotchkiss, who lived next door and shared the same enforced singleness as Amory, due to the fact that his entire class had gone to Yale. Joe’s was unaesthetic and faintly unsanitary, but a limitless charge account could be opened there, a convenience that Amory appreciated. His father had been experimenting with mining stocks and, in consequence, his allowance, while liberal, was not at all what he had expected.	Amory liked that he could charge things there.

liberal, was not at all what he had expected.	Joe’s was unaesthetic and faintly unsanitary, but a limitless charge account could be opened there, a convenience that Amory appreciated. His father had been experimenting with mining stocks and, in consequence, his allowance, while liberal, was not at all what he had expected. Joe’s had the additional advantage of seclusion from curious upper-class eyes, so at four each afternoon Amory, accompanied by friend or book, went up to experiment with his digestion.	generous, but not as much as he thought it would be.

experiment with his digestion.	His father had been experimenting with mining stocks and, in consequence, his allowance, while liberal, was not at all what he had expected. Joe’s had the additional advantage of seclusion from curious upper-class eyes, so at four each afternoon Amory, accompanied by friend or book, went up to experiment with his digestion. One day in March, finding that all the tables were occupied, he slipped into a chair opposite a freshman who bent intently over a book at the last table.	eat something.

day in March, finding that all the tables were occupied, he slipped into a chair opposite a freshman who bent intently over a book at the last table.	Joe’s had the additional advantage of seclusion from curious upper-class eyes, so at four each afternoon Amory, accompanied by friend or book, went up to experiment with his digestion. One day in March, finding that all the tables were occupied, he slipped into a chair opposite a freshman who bent intently over a book at the last table. They nodded briefly.	One day in March, all the tables were taken, so he sat down across from a freshman deeply absorbed in a book at the remaining table.

Mrs. Warren’s Profession	They nodded briefly. For twenty minutes Amory sat consuming bacon buns and reading Mrs. Warren’s Profession (he had discovered Shaw quite by accident while browsing in the library during mid-years); the other freshman, also intent on his volume, meanwhile did away with a trio of chocolate malted milks. By and by Amory’s eyes wandered curiously to his fellow-luncher’s book.	Mrs. Warren's Profession

the other freshman	They nodded briefly. For twenty minutes Amory sat consuming bacon buns and reading Mrs. Warren’s Profession (he had discovered Shaw quite by accident while browsing in the library during mid-years); the other freshman, also intent on his volume, meanwhile did away with a trio of chocolate malted milks. By and by Amory’s eyes wandered curiously to his fellow-luncher’s book.	the other first-year student

discovered Shaw quite by accident while browsing in the library during mid-years); the other freshman, also intent on his volume, meanwhile did away with a trio of chocolate malted milks.	They nodded briefly. For twenty minutes Amory sat consuming bacon buns and reading Mrs. Warren’s Profession (he had discovered Shaw quite by accident while browsing in the library during mid-years); the other freshman, also intent on his volume, meanwhile did away with a trio of chocolate malted milks. By and by Amory’s eyes wandered curiously to his fellow-luncher’s book.	found Shaw by chance while looking around the library during the middle of the semester); the other freshman, equally absorbed in his book, finished three chocolate milkshakes.

bacon buns	They nodded briefly. For twenty minutes Amory sat consuming bacon buns and reading Mrs. Warren’s Profession (he had discovered Shaw quite by accident while browsing in the library during mid-years); the other freshman, also intent on his volume, meanwhile did away with a trio of chocolate malted milks. By and by Amory’s eyes wandered curiously to his fellow-luncher’s book.	bacon buns

chocolate malted milks	They nodded briefly. For twenty minutes Amory sat consuming bacon buns and reading Mrs. Warren’s Profession (he had discovered Shaw quite by accident while browsing in the library during mid-years); the other freshman, also intent on his volume, meanwhile did away with a trio of chocolate malted milks. By and by Amory’s eyes wandered curiously to his fellow-luncher’s book.	chocolate milkshakes

wandered curiously to his fellow-luncher’s book.	For twenty minutes Amory sat consuming bacon buns and reading Mrs. Warren’s Profession (he had discovered Shaw quite by accident while browsing in the library during mid-years); the other freshman, also intent on his volume, meanwhile did away with a trio of chocolate malted milks. By and by Amory’s eyes wandered curiously to his fellow-luncher’s book. He spelled out the name and title upside down—Marpessa, by Stephen Phillips.	looked curiously at the other student's book.

his fellow-luncher’s book	For twenty minutes Amory sat consuming bacon buns and reading Mrs. Warren’s Profession (he had discovered Shaw quite by accident while browsing in the library during mid-years); the other freshman, also intent on his volume, meanwhile did away with a trio of chocolate malted milks. By and by Amory’s eyes wandered curiously to his fellow-luncher’s book. He spelled out the name and title upside down—Marpessa, by Stephen Phillips.	the other guy's book

Amory’s eyes	For twenty minutes Amory sat consuming bacon buns and reading Mrs. Warren’s Profession (he had discovered Shaw quite by accident while browsing in the library during mid-years); the other freshman, also intent on his volume, meanwhile did away with a trio of chocolate malted milks. By and by Amory’s eyes wandered curiously to his fellow-luncher’s book. He spelled out the name and title upside down—Marpessa, by Stephen Phillips.	Amory looked

Marpessa, by Stephen Phillips.	By and by Amory’s eyes wandered curiously to his fellow-luncher’s book. He spelled out the name and title upside down—Marpessa, by Stephen Phillips. This meant nothing to him, his metrical education having been confined to such Sunday classics as Come Into the Garden, Maude, and what morsels of Shakespeare and Milton had been recently forced upon him.	Marpessa, by Stephen Phillips.

morsels of Shakespeare and Milton had been recently forced upon him.	He spelled out the name and title upside down—Marpessa, by Stephen Phillips. This meant nothing to him, his metrical education having been confined to such Sunday classics as Come Into the Garden, Maude, and what morsels of Shakespeare and Milton had been recently forced upon him. Moved to address his vis-à-vis, he simulated interest in his book for a moment, and then exclaimed aloud as if involuntarily: “Ha! Great stuff!”	He'd recently been made to read bits of Shakespeare and Milton.

his metrical education	He spelled out the name and title upside down—Marpessa, by Stephen Phillips. This meant nothing to him, his metrical education having been confined to such Sunday classics as Come Into the Garden, Maude, and what morsels of Shakespeare and Milton had been recently forced upon him. Moved to address his vis-à-vis, he simulated interest in his book for a moment, and then exclaimed aloud as if involuntarily: “Ha! Great stuff!”	his knowledge of poetry

exclaimed aloud as if involuntarily: “Ha! Great stuff!”	This meant nothing to him, his metrical education having been confined to such Sunday classics as Come Into the Garden, Maude, and what morsels of Shakespeare and Milton had been recently forced upon him. Moved to address his vis-à-vis, he simulated interest in his book for a moment, and then exclaimed aloud as if involuntarily: “Ha! Great stuff!” The other freshman looked up and Amory registered artificial embarrassment.	shouted "Ha! Great stuff!" as if he hadn't meant to.

The other freshman	Moved to address his vis-à-vis, he simulated interest in his book for a moment, and then exclaimed aloud as if involuntarily: “Ha! Great stuff!” The other freshman looked up and Amory registered artificial embarrassment. “Are you referring to your bacon buns?”	The other new student

referring to your bacon buns?”	The other freshman looked up and Amory registered artificial embarrassment. “Are you referring to your bacon buns?” His cracked, kindly voice went well with the large spectacles and the impression of a voluminous keenness that he gave.	talking about your bacon buns?

your bacon buns	The other freshman looked up and Amory registered artificial embarrassment. “Are you referring to your bacon buns?” His cracked, kindly voice went well with the large spectacles and the impression of a voluminous keenness that he gave.	your bacon rolls

keenness that he gave.	“Are you referring to your bacon buns?” His cracked, kindly voice went well with the large spectacles and the impression of a voluminous keenness that he gave. “No,” Amory answered.	enthusiasm he showed.

a voluminous keenness	“Are you referring to your bacon buns?” His cracked, kindly voice went well with the large spectacles and the impression of a voluminous keenness that he gave. “No,” Amory answered.	a great intelligence

the large spectacles	“Are you referring to your bacon buns?” His cracked, kindly voice went well with the large spectacles and the impression of a voluminous keenness that he gave. “No,” Amory answered.	big glasses

D’Invilliers,” who signed the passionate love-poems in the Lit.	Of course he’s a Victorian.” They sallied into a discussion of poetry, in the course of which they introduced themselves, and Amory’s companion proved to be none other than “that awful highbrow, Thomas Parke D’Invilliers,” who signed the passionate love-poems in the Lit. He was, perhaps, nineteen, with stooped shoulders, pale blue eyes, and, as Amory could tell from his general appearance, without much conception of social competition and such phenomena of absorbing interest.	D'Invilliers, who wrote the emotional love poems in the literary magazine.

that awful highbrow	Of course he’s a Victorian.” They sallied into a discussion of poetry, in the course of which they introduced themselves, and Amory’s companion proved to be none other than “that awful highbrow, Thomas Parke D’Invilliers,” who signed the passionate love-poems in the Lit. He was, perhaps, nineteen, with stooped shoulders, pale blue eyes, and, as Amory could tell from his general appearance, without much conception of social competition and such phenomena of absorbing interest.	that pretentious intellectual

Amory’s companion	Of course he’s a Victorian.” They sallied into a discussion of poetry, in the course of which they introduced themselves, and Amory’s companion proved to be none other than “that awful highbrow, Thomas Parke D’Invilliers,” who signed the passionate love-poems in the Lit. He was, perhaps, nineteen, with stooped shoulders, pale blue eyes, and, as Amory could tell from his general appearance, without much conception of social competition and such phenomena of absorbing interest.	Amory's friend

the passionate love-poems	Of course he’s a Victorian.” They sallied into a discussion of poetry, in the course of which they introduced themselves, and Amory’s companion proved to be none other than “that awful highbrow, Thomas Parke D’Invilliers,” who signed the passionate love-poems in the Lit. He was, perhaps, nineteen, with stooped shoulders, pale blue eyes, and, as Amory could tell from his general appearance, without much conception of social competition and such phenomena of absorbing interest.	the intense love poems

absorbing interest	They sallied into a discussion of poetry, in the course of which they introduced themselves, and Amory’s companion proved to be none other than “that awful highbrow, Thomas Parke D’Invilliers,” who signed the passionate love-poems in the Lit. He was, perhaps, nineteen, with stooped shoulders, pale blue eyes, and, as Amory could tell from his general appearance, without much conception of social competition and such phenomena of absorbing interest. Still, he liked books, and it seemed forever since Amory had met anyone who did; if only that St. Paul’s crowd at the next table would not mistake him for a bird, too, he would enjoy the encounter tremendously.	great importance

tell from his general appearance, without much conception of social competition and such phenomena of absorbing interest.	They sallied into a discussion of poetry, in the course of which they introduced themselves, and Amory’s companion proved to be none other than “that awful highbrow, Thomas Parke D’Invilliers,” who signed the passionate love-poems in the Lit. He was, perhaps, nineteen, with stooped shoulders, pale blue eyes, and, as Amory could tell from his general appearance, without much conception of social competition and such phenomena of absorbing interest. Still, he liked books, and it seemed forever since Amory had met anyone who did; if only that St. Paul’s crowd at the next table would not mistake him for a bird, too, he would enjoy the encounter tremendously.	tell from the way he looked, didn't care much about social climbing or things like that.

stooped shoulders	They sallied into a discussion of poetry, in the course of which they introduced themselves, and Amory’s companion proved to be none other than “that awful highbrow, Thomas Parke D’Invilliers,” who signed the passionate love-poems in the Lit. He was, perhaps, nineteen, with stooped shoulders, pale blue eyes, and, as Amory could tell from his general appearance, without much conception of social competition and such phenomena of absorbing interest. Still, he liked books, and it seemed forever since Amory had met anyone who did; if only that St. Paul’s crowd at the next table would not mistake him for a bird, too, he would enjoy the encounter tremendously.	slouching posture

much conception	They sallied into a discussion of poetry, in the course of which they introduced themselves, and Amory’s companion proved to be none other than “that awful highbrow, Thomas Parke D’Invilliers,” who signed the passionate love-poems in the Lit. He was, perhaps, nineteen, with stooped shoulders, pale blue eyes, and, as Amory could tell from his general appearance, without much conception of social competition and such phenomena of absorbing interest. Still, he liked books, and it seemed forever since Amory had met anyone who did; if only that St. Paul’s crowd at the next table would not mistake him for a bird, too, he would enjoy the encounter tremendously.	much understanding

crowd at the next table would not mistake him for a bird, too, he would enjoy the encounter tremendously.	He was, perhaps, nineteen, with stooped shoulders, pale blue eyes, and, as Amory could tell from his general appearance, without much conception of social competition and such phenomena of absorbing interest. Still, he liked books, and it seemed forever since Amory had met anyone who did; if only that St. Paul’s crowd at the next table would not mistake him for a bird, too, he would enjoy the encounter tremendously. They didn’t seem to be noticing, so he let himself go, discussed books by the dozens—books he had read, read about, books he had never heard of, rattling off lists of titles with the facility of a Brentano’s clerk.	the group at the next table wouldn't think he was strange too, he would really enjoy talking to him.

St. Paul’s crowd	He was, perhaps, nineteen, with stooped shoulders, pale blue eyes, and, as Amory could tell from his general appearance, without much conception of social competition and such phenomena of absorbing interest. Still, he liked books, and it seemed forever since Amory had met anyone who did; if only that St. Paul’s crowd at the next table would not mistake him for a bird, too, he would enjoy the encounter tremendously. They didn’t seem to be noticing, so he let himself go, discussed books by the dozens—books he had read, read about, books he had never heard of, rattling off lists of titles with the facility of a Brentano’s clerk.	The group from St. Paul's

a Brentano’s clerk	Still, he liked books, and it seemed forever since Amory had met anyone who did; if only that St. Paul’s crowd at the next table would not mistake him for a bird, too, he would enjoy the encounter tremendously. They didn’t seem to be noticing, so he let himself go, discussed books by the dozens—books he had read, read about, books he had never heard of, rattling off lists of titles with the facility of a Brentano’s clerk. D’Invilliers was partially taken in and wholly delighted.	a bookstore employee

books he had never heard of, rattling off lists of titles with the facility of a Brentano’s clerk.	Still, he liked books, and it seemed forever since Amory had met anyone who did; if only that St. Paul’s crowd at the next table would not mistake him for a bird, too, he would enjoy the encounter tremendously. They didn’t seem to be noticing, so he let himself go, discussed books by the dozens—books he had read, read about, books he had never heard of, rattling off lists of titles with the facility of a Brentano’s clerk. D’Invilliers was partially taken in and wholly delighted.	books he didn't know, reeling off title lists like a bookstore employee.

a good-natured way	D’Invilliers was partially taken in and wholly delighted. In a good-natured way he had almost decided that Princeton was one part deadly Philistines and one part deadly grinds, and to find a person who could mention Keats without stammering, yet evidently washed his hands, was rather a treat. “Ever read any Oscar Wilde?” he asked.	in a friendly manner

one part deadly grinds	D’Invilliers was partially taken in and wholly delighted. In a good-natured way he had almost decided that Princeton was one part deadly Philistines and one part deadly grinds, and to find a person who could mention Keats without stammering, yet evidently washed his hands, was rather a treat. “Ever read any Oscar Wilde?” he asked.	one part really hard workers

one part deadly Philistines	D’Invilliers was partially taken in and wholly delighted. In a good-natured way he had almost decided that Princeton was one part deadly Philistines and one part deadly grinds, and to find a person who could mention Keats without stammering, yet evidently washed his hands, was rather a treat. “Ever read any Oscar Wilde?” he asked.	one part boring and uncultured people

any Oscar Wilde	In a good-natured way he had almost decided that Princeton was one part deadly Philistines and one part deadly grinds, and to find a person who could mention Keats without stammering, yet evidently washed his hands, was rather a treat. “Ever read any Oscar Wilde?” he asked. “No.	Any Oscar Wilde?

man—don’t you know?”	Who wrote it?” “It’s a man—don’t you know?” “Oh, surely.”	It's a man, didn't you know?

Amory’s memory	“Oh, surely.” A faint chord was struck in Amory’s memory. “Wasn’t the comic opera, Patience, written about him?”	Amory remembered something.

A faint chord	“Oh, surely.” A faint chord was struck in Amory’s memory. “Wasn’t the comic opera, Patience, written about him?”	A faint bell rang.

struck in Amory’s memory.	“Oh, surely.” A faint chord was struck in Amory’s memory. “Wasn’t the comic opera, Patience, written about him?”	Amory remembered something.

Picture of Dorian Gray, and I certainly wish you’d read it.	“Yes, that’s the fella. I’ve just finished a book of his, The Picture of Dorian Gray, and I certainly wish you’d read it. You’d like it.	Picture of Dorian Gray, and I really hope you read it.

You’d like it.	I’ve just finished a book of his, The Picture of Dorian Gray, and I certainly wish you’d read it. You’d like it. You can borrow it if you want to.”	You'd like it.

borrow it if you want to.”	You’d like it. You can borrow it if you want to.” “Why, I’d like it a lot—thanks.”	borrow it if you want.

addition of this friend would be.	I’ve got a few other books.” Amory hesitated, glanced at the St. Paul’s group—one of them was the magnificent, exquisite Humbird—and he considered how determinate the addition of this friend would be. He never got to the stage of making them and getting rid of them—he was not hard enough for that—so he measured Thomas Parke D’Invilliers’ undoubted attractions and value against the menace of cold eyes behind tortoise-rimmed spectacles that he fancied glared from the next table.	what having this friend would be like.

the St. Paul’s group	I’ve got a few other books.” Amory hesitated, glanced at the St. Paul’s group—one of them was the magnificent, exquisite Humbird—and he considered how determinate the addition of this friend would be. He never got to the stage of making them and getting rid of them—he was not hard enough for that—so he measured Thomas Parke D’Invilliers’ undoubted attractions and value against the menace of cold eyes behind tortoise-rimmed spectacles that he fancied glared from the next table.	the group from St. Paul's

the magnificent, exquisite Humbird	I’ve got a few other books.” Amory hesitated, glanced at the St. Paul’s group—one of them was the magnificent, exquisite Humbird—and he considered how determinate the addition of this friend would be. He never got to the stage of making them and getting rid of them—he was not hard enough for that—so he measured Thomas Parke D’Invilliers’ undoubted attractions and value against the menace of cold eyes behind tortoise-rimmed spectacles that he fancied glared from the next table.	the impressive and beautiful Humbird

tortoise-rimmed spectacles	Amory hesitated, glanced at the St. Paul’s group—one of them was the magnificent, exquisite Humbird—and he considered how determinate the addition of this friend would be. He never got to the stage of making them and getting rid of them—he was not hard enough for that—so he measured Thomas Parke D’Invilliers’ undoubted attractions and value against the menace of cold eyes behind tortoise-rimmed spectacles that he fancied glared from the next table. “Yes, I’ll go.”	glasses with frames made of tortoiseshell material

D’Invilliers’ undoubted attractions	Amory hesitated, glanced at the St. Paul’s group—one of them was the magnificent, exquisite Humbird—and he considered how determinate the addition of this friend would be. He never got to the stage of making them and getting rid of them—he was not hard enough for that—so he measured Thomas Parke D’Invilliers’ undoubted attractions and value against the menace of cold eyes behind tortoise-rimmed spectacles that he fancied glared from the next table. “Yes, I’ll go.”	D'Invilliers' obvious good qualities

hard enough for that—so he measured Thomas Parke D’Invilliers’ undoubted attractions and value against the menace of cold eyes behind tortoise-rimmed spectacles that he fancied glared from the next table.	Amory hesitated, glanced at the St. Paul’s group—one of them was the magnificent, exquisite Humbird—and he considered how determinate the addition of this friend would be. He never got to the stage of making them and getting rid of them—he was not hard enough for that—so he measured Thomas Parke D’Invilliers’ undoubted attractions and value against the menace of cold eyes behind tortoise-rimmed spectacles that he fancied glared from the next table. “Yes, I’ll go.”	tough enough to do that, so he weighed Thomas Parke D’Invilliers’ good qualities and worth against the threat of cold, glaring eyes from behind glasses at the next table.

sans Merci	“Yes, I’ll go.” So he found Dorian Gray and the Mystic and Somber Dolores and the Belle Dame sans Merci; for a month was keen on naught else. The world became pale and interesting, and he tried hard to look at Princeton through the satiated eyes of Oscar Wilde and Swinburne—or “Fingal O’Flaherty” and “Algernon Charles,” as he called them in précieuse jest.	Without mercy.

keen on naught else.	“Yes, I’ll go.” So he found Dorian Gray and the Mystic and Somber Dolores and the Belle Dame sans Merci; for a month was keen on naught else. The world became pale and interesting, and he tried hard to look at Princeton through the satiated eyes of Oscar Wilde and Swinburne—or “Fingal O’Flaherty” and “Algernon Charles,” as he called them in précieuse jest.	interested in nothing else.

the Mystic and Somber Dolores	“Yes, I’ll go.” So he found Dorian Gray and the Mystic and Somber Dolores and the Belle Dame sans Merci; for a month was keen on naught else. The world became pale and interesting, and he tried hard to look at Princeton through the satiated eyes of Oscar Wilde and Swinburne—or “Fingal O’Flaherty” and “Algernon Charles,” as he called them in précieuse jest.	The mysterious and gloomy Dolores

“Fingal O’Flaherty	So he found Dorian Gray and the Mystic and Somber Dolores and the Belle Dame sans Merci; for a month was keen on naught else. The world became pale and interesting, and he tried hard to look at Princeton through the satiated eyes of Oscar Wilde and Swinburne—or “Fingal O’Flaherty” and “Algernon Charles,” as he called them in précieuse jest. He read enormously every night—Shaw, Chesterton, Barrie, Pinero, Yeats, Synge, Ernest Dowson, Arthur Symons, Keats, Sudermann, Robert Hugh Benson, the Savoy Operas—just a heterogeneous mixture, for he suddenly discovered that he had read nothing for years.	Oscar Wilde

“Algernon Charles	So he found Dorian Gray and the Mystic and Somber Dolores and the Belle Dame sans Merci; for a month was keen on naught else. The world became pale and interesting, and he tried hard to look at Princeton through the satiated eyes of Oscar Wilde and Swinburne—or “Fingal O’Flaherty” and “Algernon Charles,” as he called them in précieuse jest. He read enormously every night—Shaw, Chesterton, Barrie, Pinero, Yeats, Synge, Ernest Dowson, Arthur Symons, Keats, Sudermann, Robert Hugh Benson, the Savoy Operas—just a heterogeneous mixture, for he suddenly discovered that he had read nothing for years.	Algernon Charles

tried hard to look at Princeton through the satiated eyes of Oscar Wilde and Swinburne—or “Fingal O’Flaherty” and “Algernon Charles,” as he called them in précieuse jest.	So he found Dorian Gray and the Mystic and Somber Dolores and the Belle Dame sans Merci; for a month was keen on naught else. The world became pale and interesting, and he tried hard to look at Princeton through the satiated eyes of Oscar Wilde and Swinburne—or “Fingal O’Flaherty” and “Algernon Charles,” as he called them in précieuse jest. He read enormously every night—Shaw, Chesterton, Barrie, Pinero, Yeats, Synge, Ernest Dowson, Arthur Symons, Keats, Sudermann, Robert Hugh Benson, the Savoy Operas—just a heterogeneous mixture, for he suddenly discovered that he had read nothing for years.	He tried hard to see Princeton the way Oscar Wilde and Swinburne would, joking about them by using their full, fancy names.

the satiated eyes	So he found Dorian Gray and the Mystic and Somber Dolores and the Belle Dame sans Merci; for a month was keen on naught else. The world became pale and interesting, and he tried hard to look at Princeton through the satiated eyes of Oscar Wilde and Swinburne—or “Fingal O’Flaherty” and “Algernon Charles,” as he called them in précieuse jest. He read enormously every night—Shaw, Chesterton, Barrie, Pinero, Yeats, Synge, Ernest Dowson, Arthur Symons, Keats, Sudermann, Robert Hugh Benson, the Savoy Operas—just a heterogeneous mixture, for he suddenly discovered that he had read nothing for years.	the bored eyes

précieuse jest	So he found Dorian Gray and the Mystic and Somber Dolores and the Belle Dame sans Merci; for a month was keen on naught else. The world became pale and interesting, and he tried hard to look at Princeton through the satiated eyes of Oscar Wilde and Swinburne—or “Fingal O’Flaherty” and “Algernon Charles,” as he called them in précieuse jest. He read enormously every night—Shaw, Chesterton, Barrie, Pinero, Yeats, Synge, Ernest Dowson, Arthur Symons, Keats, Sudermann, Robert Hugh Benson, the Savoy Operas—just a heterogeneous mixture, for he suddenly discovered that he had read nothing for years.	Affected joke.

just a heterogeneous mixture	The world became pale and interesting, and he tried hard to look at Princeton through the satiated eyes of Oscar Wilde and Swinburne—or “Fingal O’Flaherty” and “Algernon Charles,” as he called them in précieuse jest. He read enormously every night—Shaw, Chesterton, Barrie, Pinero, Yeats, Synge, Ernest Dowson, Arthur Symons, Keats, Sudermann, Robert Hugh Benson, the Savoy Operas—just a heterogeneous mixture, for he suddenly discovered that he had read nothing for years. Tom D’Invilliers became at first an occasion rather than a friend.	just a random mix

the Savoy Operas	The world became pale and interesting, and he tried hard to look at Princeton through the satiated eyes of Oscar Wilde and Swinburne—or “Fingal O’Flaherty” and “Algernon Charles,” as he called them in précieuse jest. He read enormously every night—Shaw, Chesterton, Barrie, Pinero, Yeats, Synge, Ernest Dowson, Arthur Symons, Keats, Sudermann, Robert Hugh Benson, the Savoy Operas—just a heterogeneous mixture, for he suddenly discovered that he had read nothing for years. Tom D’Invilliers became at first an occasion rather than a friend.	The comic operas produced at the Savoy Theatre

Tom D’Invilliers	He read enormously every night—Shaw, Chesterton, Barrie, Pinero, Yeats, Synge, Ernest Dowson, Arthur Symons, Keats, Sudermann, Robert Hugh Benson, the Savoy Operas—just a heterogeneous mixture, for he suddenly discovered that he had read nothing for years. Tom D’Invilliers became at first an occasion rather than a friend. Amory saw him about once a week, and together they gilded the ceiling of Tom’s room and decorated the walls with imitation tapestry, bought at an auction, tall candlesticks and figured curtains.	Tom D'Invilliers

became at first an occasion rather than a friend.	He read enormously every night—Shaw, Chesterton, Barrie, Pinero, Yeats, Synge, Ernest Dowson, Arthur Symons, Keats, Sudermann, Robert Hugh Benson, the Savoy Operas—just a heterogeneous mixture, for he suddenly discovered that he had read nothing for years. Tom D’Invilliers became at first an occasion rather than a friend. Amory saw him about once a week, and together they gilded the ceiling of Tom’s room and decorated the walls with imitation tapestry, bought at an auction, tall candlesticks and figured curtains.	was more of an activity than a friend at first.

tall candlesticks	Tom D’Invilliers became at first an occasion rather than a friend. Amory saw him about once a week, and together they gilded the ceiling of Tom’s room and decorated the walls with imitation tapestry, bought at an auction, tall candlesticks and figured curtains. Amory liked him for being clever and literary without effeminacy or affectation.	tall candlesticks

ceiling of Tom’s room and decorated the walls with imitation tapestry, bought at an auction, tall candlesticks and figured curtains.	Tom D’Invilliers became at first an occasion rather than a friend. Amory saw him about once a week, and together they gilded the ceiling of Tom’s room and decorated the walls with imitation tapestry, bought at an auction, tall candlesticks and figured curtains. Amory liked him for being clever and literary without effeminacy or affectation.	Tom's room ceiling and put up fake tapestry from an auction, tall candlesticks, and patterned curtains on the walls.

imitation tapestry	Tom D’Invilliers became at first an occasion rather than a friend. Amory saw him about once a week, and together they gilded the ceiling of Tom’s room and decorated the walls with imitation tapestry, bought at an auction, tall candlesticks and figured curtains. Amory liked him for being clever and literary without effeminacy or affectation.	fake tapestry

Tom’s room	Tom D’Invilliers became at first an occasion rather than a friend. Amory saw him about once a week, and together they gilded the ceiling of Tom’s room and decorated the walls with imitation tapestry, bought at an auction, tall candlesticks and figured curtains. Amory liked him for being clever and literary without effeminacy or affectation.	Tom's room

figured curtains	Tom D’Invilliers became at first an occasion rather than a friend. Amory saw him about once a week, and together they gilded the ceiling of Tom’s room and decorated the walls with imitation tapestry, bought at an auction, tall candlesticks and figured curtains. Amory liked him for being clever and literary without effeminacy or affectation.	Curtains with patterns.

being clever and literary without effeminacy or affectation.	Amory saw him about once a week, and together they gilded the ceiling of Tom’s room and decorated the walls with imitation tapestry, bought at an auction, tall candlesticks and figured curtains. Amory liked him for being clever and literary without effeminacy or affectation. In fact, Amory did most of the strutting and tried painfully to make every remark an epigram, than which, if one is content with ostensible epigrams, there are many feats harder.	He was smart and well-read, but not in a pretentious or womanly way.

epigram, than which, if one is content with ostensible epigrams, there are many feats harder.	Amory liked him for being clever and literary without effeminacy or affectation. In fact, Amory did most of the strutting and tried painfully to make every remark an epigram, than which, if one is content with ostensible epigrams, there are many feats harder. 12 Univee was amused.	It's harder to be genuinely witty than to just try to sound witty.

ostensible epigrams	Amory liked him for being clever and literary without effeminacy or affectation. In fact, Amory did most of the strutting and tried painfully to make every remark an epigram, than which, if one is content with ostensible epigrams, there are many feats harder. 12 Univee was amused.	obvious witty remarks

12 Univee	In fact, Amory did most of the strutting and tried painfully to make every remark an epigram, than which, if one is content with ostensible epigrams, there are many feats harder. 12 Univee was amused. Kerry read Dorian Gray and simulated Lord Henry, following Amory about, addressing him as “Dorian” and pretending to encourage in him wicked fancies and attenuated tendencies to ennui.	Univee

addressing him as “Dorian” and pretending to encourage in him wicked fancies and attenuated tendencies to ennui.	12 Univee was amused. Kerry read Dorian Gray and simulated Lord Henry, following Amory about, addressing him as “Dorian” and pretending to encourage in him wicked fancies and attenuated tendencies to ennui. When he carried it into Commons, to the amazement of the others at table, Amory became furiously embarrassed, and after that made epigrams only before D’Invilliers or a convenient mirror.	calling him "Dorian" and pretending to push him toward bad ideas and a weak inclination to boredom.

simulated Lord Henry	12 Univee was amused. Kerry read Dorian Gray and simulated Lord Henry, following Amory about, addressing him as “Dorian” and pretending to encourage in him wicked fancies and attenuated tendencies to ennui. When he carried it into Commons, to the amazement of the others at table, Amory became furiously embarrassed, and after that made epigrams only before D’Invilliers or a convenient mirror.	acted like Lord Henry

made epigrams only before D’Invilliers or a convenient mirror.	Kerry read Dorian Gray and simulated Lord Henry, following Amory about, addressing him as “Dorian” and pretending to encourage in him wicked fancies and attenuated tendencies to ennui. When he carried it into Commons, to the amazement of the others at table, Amory became furiously embarrassed, and after that made epigrams only before D’Invilliers or a convenient mirror. One day Tom and Amory tried reciting their own and Lord Dunsany’s poems to the music of Kerry’s graphophone.	only made witty remarks when D'Invilliers was around or when he was alone.

poems to the music of Kerry’s graphophone.	When he carried it into Commons, to the amazement of the others at table, Amory became furiously embarrassed, and after that made epigrams only before D’Invilliers or a convenient mirror. One day Tom and Amory tried reciting their own and Lord Dunsany’s poems to the music of Kerry’s graphophone. “Chant!” cried Tom.	poems to music on Kerry's record player.

Lord Dunsany’s poems	When he carried it into Commons, to the amazement of the others at table, Amory became furiously embarrassed, and after that made epigrams only before D’Invilliers or a convenient mirror. One day Tom and Amory tried reciting their own and Lord Dunsany’s poems to the music of Kerry’s graphophone. “Chant!” cried Tom.	Poems by Lord Dunsany

Kerry’s graphophone	When he carried it into Commons, to the amazement of the others at table, Amory became furiously embarrassed, and after that made epigrams only before D’Invilliers or a convenient mirror. One day Tom and Amory tried reciting their own and Lord Dunsany’s poems to the music of Kerry’s graphophone. “Chant!” cried Tom.	Kerry's record player

record with less piano in it.	Chant!” Amory, who was performing, looked annoyed, and claimed that he needed a record with less piano in it. Kerry thereupon rolled on the floor in stifled laughter.	a record with less piano on it.

rolled on the floor in stifled laughter.	Amory, who was performing, looked annoyed, and claimed that he needed a record with less piano in it. Kerry thereupon rolled on the floor in stifled laughter. “Put on ‘Hearts and Flowers’!”	burst out laughing while trying to hold it in and rolled around on the floor.

stifled laughter	Amory, who was performing, looked annoyed, and claimed that he needed a record with less piano in it. Kerry thereupon rolled on the floor in stifled laughter. “Put on ‘Hearts and Flowers’!”	laughter he was trying not to show

the damn graphophone	“Oh, my Lord, I’m going to cast a kitten.” “Shut off the damn graphophone,” Amory cried, rather red in the face. “I’m not giving an exhibition.”	The damn record player

conventional than he, and needed merely watered hair, a smaller range of conversation, and a darker brown hat to become quite regular.	“I’m not giving an exhibition.” In the meanwhile Amory delicately kept trying to awaken a sense of the social system in D’Invilliers, for he knew that this poet was really more conventional than he, and needed merely watered hair, a smaller range of conversation, and a darker brown hat to become quite regular. But the liturgy of Livingstone collars and dark ties fell on heedless ears; in fact D’Invilliers faintly resented his efforts; so Amory confined himself to calls once a week, and brought him occasionally to 12 Univee.	more conventional than him and just needed tidier hair, less to say, and a darker hat to fit in perfectly.

brought him occasionally to 12 Univee.	In the meanwhile Amory delicately kept trying to awaken a sense of the social system in D’Invilliers, for he knew that this poet was really more conventional than he, and needed merely watered hair, a smaller range of conversation, and a darker brown hat to become quite regular. But the liturgy of Livingstone collars and dark ties fell on heedless ears; in fact D’Invilliers faintly resented his efforts; so Amory confined himself to calls once a week, and brought him occasionally to 12 Univee. This caused mild titters among the other freshmen, who called them “Doctor Johnson and Boswell.”	sometimes took him to 12 Univee.

heedless ears	In the meanwhile Amory delicately kept trying to awaken a sense of the social system in D’Invilliers, for he knew that this poet was really more conventional than he, and needed merely watered hair, a smaller range of conversation, and a darker brown hat to become quite regular. But the liturgy of Livingstone collars and dark ties fell on heedless ears; in fact D’Invilliers faintly resented his efforts; so Amory confined himself to calls once a week, and brought him occasionally to 12 Univee. This caused mild titters among the other freshmen, who called them “Doctor Johnson and Boswell.”	unresponsive ears

Livingstone collars	In the meanwhile Amory delicately kept trying to awaken a sense of the social system in D’Invilliers, for he knew that this poet was really more conventional than he, and needed merely watered hair, a smaller range of conversation, and a darker brown hat to become quite regular. But the liturgy of Livingstone collars and dark ties fell on heedless ears; in fact D’Invilliers faintly resented his efforts; so Amory confined himself to calls once a week, and brought him occasionally to 12 Univee. This caused mild titters among the other freshmen, who called them “Doctor Johnson and Boswell.”	High, stiff collars like the ones worn by the explorer David Livingstone.

12 Univee	In the meanwhile Amory delicately kept trying to awaken a sense of the social system in D’Invilliers, for he knew that this poet was really more conventional than he, and needed merely watered hair, a smaller range of conversation, and a darker brown hat to become quite regular. But the liturgy of Livingstone collars and dark ties fell on heedless ears; in fact D’Invilliers faintly resented his efforts; so Amory confined himself to calls once a week, and brought him occasionally to 12 Univee. This caused mild titters among the other freshmen, who called them “Doctor Johnson and Boswell.”	12 University Place

mild titters	But the liturgy of Livingstone collars and dark ties fell on heedless ears; in fact D’Invilliers faintly resented his efforts; so Amory confined himself to calls once a week, and brought him occasionally to 12 Univee. This caused mild titters among the other freshmen, who called them “Doctor Johnson and Boswell.” Alec Connage, another frequent visitor, liked him in a vague way, but was afraid of him as a highbrow.	quiet laughs

the other freshmen	But the liturgy of Livingstone collars and dark ties fell on heedless ears; in fact D’Invilliers faintly resented his efforts; so Amory confined himself to calls once a week, and brought him occasionally to 12 Univee. This caused mild titters among the other freshmen, who called them “Doctor Johnson and Boswell.” Alec Connage, another frequent visitor, liked him in a vague way, but was afraid of him as a highbrow.	the other first-year students

freshmen, who called them “Doctor Johnson and Boswell.”	But the liturgy of Livingstone collars and dark ties fell on heedless ears; in fact D’Invilliers faintly resented his efforts; so Amory confined himself to calls once a week, and brought him occasionally to 12 Univee. This caused mild titters among the other freshmen, who called them “Doctor Johnson and Boswell.” Alec Connage, another frequent visitor, liked him in a vague way, but was afraid of him as a highbrow.	freshmen, who nicknamed them "Doctor Johnson and Boswell."

a vague way	This caused mild titters among the other freshmen, who called them “Doctor Johnson and Boswell.” Alec Connage, another frequent visitor, liked him in a vague way, but was afraid of him as a highbrow. Kerry, who saw through his poetic patter to the solid, almost respectable depths within, was immensely amused and would have him recite poetry by the hour, while he lay with closed eyes on Amory’s sofa and listened: “Asleep or waking is it?	not really knowing why

Connage, another frequent visitor, liked him in a vague way, but was afraid of him as a highbrow.	This caused mild titters among the other freshmen, who called them “Doctor Johnson and Boswell.” Alec Connage, another frequent visitor, liked him in a vague way, but was afraid of him as a highbrow. Kerry, who saw through his poetic patter to the solid, almost respectable depths within, was immensely amused and would have him recite poetry by the hour, while he lay with closed eyes on Amory’s sofa and listened: “Asleep or waking is it?	Connage, who also visited often, kind of liked him, but was intimidated by his intelligence.

the solid, almost respectable depths	Alec Connage, another frequent visitor, liked him in a vague way, but was afraid of him as a highbrow. Kerry, who saw through his poetic patter to the solid, almost respectable depths within, was immensely amused and would have him recite poetry by the hour, while he lay with closed eyes on Amory’s sofa and listened: “Asleep or waking is it? for her neck Kissed over close, wears yet a purple speck Wherein the pained blood falters and goes out; Soft and stung softly—fairer for a fleck.”	his dependable, almost proper side

Amory’s sofa	Alec Connage, another frequent visitor, liked him in a vague way, but was afraid of him as a highbrow. Kerry, who saw through his poetic patter to the solid, almost respectable depths within, was immensely amused and would have him recite poetry by the hour, while he lay with closed eyes on Amory’s sofa and listened: “Asleep or waking is it? for her neck Kissed over close, wears yet a purple speck Wherein the pained blood falters and goes out; Soft and stung softly—fairer for a fleck.”	Amory's sofa

lay with closed eyes on Amory’s sofa and listened: “Asleep or waking is it?	Alec Connage, another frequent visitor, liked him in a vague way, but was afraid of him as a highbrow. Kerry, who saw through his poetic patter to the solid, almost respectable depths within, was immensely amused and would have him recite poetry by the hour, while he lay with closed eyes on Amory’s sofa and listened: “Asleep or waking is it? for her neck Kissed over close, wears yet a purple speck Wherein the pained blood falters and goes out; Soft and stung softly—fairer for a fleck.”	lay with closed eyes on Amory's sofa and listened: "Am I asleep or awake?

his poetic patter	Alec Connage, another frequent visitor, liked him in a vague way, but was afraid of him as a highbrow. Kerry, who saw through his poetic patter to the solid, almost respectable depths within, was immensely amused and would have him recite poetry by the hour, while he lay with closed eyes on Amory’s sofa and listened: “Asleep or waking is it? for her neck Kissed over close, wears yet a purple speck Wherein the pained blood falters and goes out; Soft and stung softly—fairer for a fleck.”	his flowery, poetic way of talking

the pained blood	Kerry, who saw through his poetic patter to the solid, almost respectable depths within, was immensely amused and would have him recite poetry by the hour, while he lay with closed eyes on Amory’s sofa and listened: “Asleep or waking is it? for her neck Kissed over close, wears yet a purple speck Wherein the pained blood falters and goes out; Soft and stung softly—fairer for a fleck.” “That’s good,” Kerry would say softly.	hurt blood

wears yet a purple speck Wherein the pained blood falters and goes out; Soft and stung softly—fairer for a fleck.”	Kerry, who saw through his poetic patter to the solid, almost respectable depths within, was immensely amused and would have him recite poetry by the hour, while he lay with closed eyes on Amory’s sofa and listened: “Asleep or waking is it? for her neck Kissed over close, wears yet a purple speck Wherein the pained blood falters and goes out; Soft and stung softly—fairer for a fleck.” “That’s good,” Kerry would say softly.	still has a purple mark where the injured blood weakens and fades; gently stung—made more beautiful by the mark.

a purple speck	Kerry, who saw through his poetic patter to the solid, almost respectable depths within, was immensely amused and would have him recite poetry by the hour, while he lay with closed eyes on Amory’s sofa and listened: “Asleep or waking is it? for her neck Kissed over close, wears yet a purple speck Wherein the pained blood falters and goes out; Soft and stung softly—fairer for a fleck.” “That’s good,” Kerry would say softly.	A purple mark.

the elder Holiday	“That’s good,” Kerry would say softly. “It pleases the elder Holiday. That’s a great poet, I guess.”	Old Holiday

took to writing poetry on spring afternoons, in the gardens of the big estates near Princeton, while swans made effective atmosphere in the artificial pools, and slow clouds sailed harmoniously above the willows.	Tom, delighted at an audience, would ramble through the Poems and Ballades until Kerry and Amory knew them almost as well as he. Amory took to writing poetry on spring afternoons, in the gardens of the big estates near Princeton, while swans made effective atmosphere in the artificial pools, and slow clouds sailed harmoniously above the willows. May came too soon, and suddenly unable to bear walls, he wandered the campus at all hours through starlight and rain.	started writing poems on spring afternoons in the gardens of the large properties near Princeton, where swans in the man-made ponds and slow clouds above the willows created a beautiful setting.

hours through starlight and rain.	Amory took to writing poetry on spring afternoons, in the gardens of the big estates near Princeton, while swans made effective atmosphere in the artificial pools, and slow clouds sailed harmoniously above the willows. May came too soon, and suddenly unable to bear walls, he wandered the campus at all hours through starlight and rain.	hours in the starlight and rain.

 The night mist	The night mist fell. From the moon it rolled, clustered about the spires and towers, and then settled below them, so that the dreaming peaks were still in lofty aspiration toward the sky.	The night mist.

moon it rolled, clustered about the spires and towers, and then settled below them, so that the dreaming peaks were still in lofty aspiration toward the sky.	The night mist fell. From the moon it rolled, clustered about the spires and towers, and then settled below them, so that the dreaming peaks were still in lofty aspiration toward the sky. Figures that dotted the day like ants now brushed along as shadowy ghosts, in and out of the foreground.	It rolled from the moon, gathered around the spires and towers, and then settled below them, leaving the peaks still reaching for the sky.

lofty aspiration	The night mist fell. From the moon it rolled, clustered about the spires and towers, and then settled below them, so that the dreaming peaks were still in lofty aspiration toward the sky. Figures that dotted the day like ants now brushed along as shadowy ghosts, in and out of the foreground.	reaching high

shadowy ghosts	From the moon it rolled, clustered about the spires and towers, and then settled below them, so that the dreaming peaks were still in lofty aspiration toward the sky. Figures that dotted the day like ants now brushed along as shadowy ghosts, in and out of the foreground. The Gothic halls and cloisters were infinitely more mysterious as they loomed suddenly out of the darkness, outlined each by myriad faint squares of yellow light.	ghostly shadows

ants now brushed along as shadowy ghosts, in and out of the foreground.	From the moon it rolled, clustered about the spires and towers, and then settled below them, so that the dreaming peaks were still in lofty aspiration toward the sky. Figures that dotted the day like ants now brushed along as shadowy ghosts, in and out of the foreground. The Gothic halls and cloisters were infinitely more mysterious as they loomed suddenly out of the darkness, outlined each by myriad faint squares of yellow light.	People who looked like ants from afar moved like shadowy ghosts, appearing and disappearing.

out of the darkness, outlined each by myriad faint squares of yellow light.	Figures that dotted the day like ants now brushed along as shadowy ghosts, in and out of the foreground. The Gothic halls and cloisters were infinitely more mysterious as they loomed suddenly out of the darkness, outlined each by myriad faint squares of yellow light. Indefinitely from somewhere a bell boomed the quarter-hour, and Amory, pausing by the sundial, stretched himself out full length on the damp grass.	each building was outlined by countless faint yellow squares of light.

myriad faint squares	Figures that dotted the day like ants now brushed along as shadowy ghosts, in and out of the foreground. The Gothic halls and cloisters were infinitely more mysterious as they loomed suddenly out of the darkness, outlined each by myriad faint squares of yellow light. Indefinitely from somewhere a bell boomed the quarter-hour, and Amory, pausing by the sundial, stretched himself out full length on the damp grass.	countless faint squares

the damp grass	The Gothic halls and cloisters were infinitely more mysterious as they loomed suddenly out of the darkness, outlined each by myriad faint squares of yellow light. Indefinitely from somewhere a bell boomed the quarter-hour, and Amory, pausing by the sundial, stretched himself out full length on the damp grass. The cool bathed his eyes and slowed the flight of time—time that had crept so insidiously through the lazy April afternoons, seemed so intangible in the long spring twilights.	the wet grass

stretched himself out full length on the damp grass.	The Gothic halls and cloisters were infinitely more mysterious as they loomed suddenly out of the darkness, outlined each by myriad faint squares of yellow light. Indefinitely from somewhere a bell boomed the quarter-hour, and Amory, pausing by the sundial, stretched himself out full length on the damp grass. The cool bathed his eyes and slowed the flight of time—time that had crept so insidiously through the lazy April afternoons, seemed so intangible in the long spring twilights.	lay down completely on the wet grass.

the long spring twilights	Indefinitely from somewhere a bell boomed the quarter-hour, and Amory, pausing by the sundial, stretched himself out full length on the damp grass. The cool bathed his eyes and slowed the flight of time—time that had crept so insidiously through the lazy April afternoons, seemed so intangible in the long spring twilights. Evening after evening the senior singing had drifted over the campus in melancholy beauty, and through the shell of his undergraduate consciousness had broken a deep and reverent devotion to the gray walls and Gothic peaks and all they symbolized as warehouses of dead ages.	the long evenings in spring

flight of time—time that had crept so insidiously through the lazy April afternoons, seemed so intangible in the long spring twilights.	Indefinitely from somewhere a bell boomed the quarter-hour, and Amory, pausing by the sundial, stretched himself out full length on the damp grass. The cool bathed his eyes and slowed the flight of time—time that had crept so insidiously through the lazy April afternoons, seemed so intangible in the long spring twilights. Evening after evening the senior singing had drifted over the campus in melancholy beauty, and through the shell of his undergraduate consciousness had broken a deep and reverent devotion to the gray walls and Gothic peaks and all they symbolized as warehouses of dead ages.	Time seemed to creep by unnoticed on those lazy April afternoons and felt so unreal during the long spring evenings.

all they symbolized as warehouses of dead ages.	The cool bathed his eyes and slowed the flight of time—time that had crept so insidiously through the lazy April afternoons, seemed so intangible in the long spring twilights. Evening after evening the senior singing had drifted over the campus in melancholy beauty, and through the shell of his undergraduate consciousness had broken a deep and reverent devotion to the gray walls and Gothic peaks and all they symbolized as warehouses of dead ages. The tower that in view of his window sprang upward, grew into a spire, yearning higher until its uppermost tip was half invisible against the morning skies, gave him the first sense of the transiency and unimportance of the campus figures except as holders of the apostolic succession.	everything they represented as storehouses of history.

melancholy beauty	The cool bathed his eyes and slowed the flight of time—time that had crept so insidiously through the lazy April afternoons, seemed so intangible in the long spring twilights. Evening after evening the senior singing had drifted over the campus in melancholy beauty, and through the shell of his undergraduate consciousness had broken a deep and reverent devotion to the gray walls and Gothic peaks and all they symbolized as warehouses of dead ages. The tower that in view of his window sprang upward, grew into a spire, yearning higher until its uppermost tip was half invisible against the morning skies, gave him the first sense of the transiency and unimportance of the campus figures except as holders of the apostolic succession.	sad beauty

a deep and reverent devotion	The cool bathed his eyes and slowed the flight of time—time that had crept so insidiously through the lazy April afternoons, seemed so intangible in the long spring twilights. Evening after evening the senior singing had drifted over the campus in melancholy beauty, and through the shell of his undergraduate consciousness had broken a deep and reverent devotion to the gray walls and Gothic peaks and all they symbolized as warehouses of dead ages. The tower that in view of his window sprang upward, grew into a spire, yearning higher until its uppermost tip was half invisible against the morning skies, gave him the first sense of the transiency and unimportance of the campus figures except as holders of the apostolic succession.	a strong and respectful love

holders of the apostolic succession.	Evening after evening the senior singing had drifted over the campus in melancholy beauty, and through the shell of his undergraduate consciousness had broken a deep and reverent devotion to the gray walls and Gothic peaks and all they symbolized as warehouses of dead ages. The tower that in view of his window sprang upward, grew into a spire, yearning higher until its uppermost tip was half invisible against the morning skies, gave him the first sense of the transiency and unimportance of the campus figures except as holders of the apostolic succession. He liked knowing that Gothic architecture, with its upward trend, was peculiarly appropriate to universities, and the idea became personal to him.	those who carry on the traditions.

the apostolic succession	Evening after evening the senior singing had drifted over the campus in melancholy beauty, and through the shell of his undergraduate consciousness had broken a deep and reverent devotion to the gray walls and Gothic peaks and all they symbolized as warehouses of dead ages. The tower that in view of his window sprang upward, grew into a spire, yearning higher until its uppermost tip was half invisible against the morning skies, gave him the first sense of the transiency and unimportance of the campus figures except as holders of the apostolic succession. He liked knowing that Gothic architecture, with its upward trend, was peculiarly appropriate to universities, and the idea became personal to him.	a historical line of important figures

its uppermost tip	Evening after evening the senior singing had drifted over the campus in melancholy beauty, and through the shell of his undergraduate consciousness had broken a deep and reverent devotion to the gray walls and Gothic peaks and all they symbolized as warehouses of dead ages. The tower that in view of his window sprang upward, grew into a spire, yearning higher until its uppermost tip was half invisible against the morning skies, gave him the first sense of the transiency and unimportance of the campus figures except as holders of the apostolic succession. He liked knowing that Gothic architecture, with its upward trend, was peculiarly appropriate to universities, and the idea became personal to him.	its very top

architecture, with its upward trend, was peculiarly appropriate to universities, and the idea became personal to him.	The tower that in view of his window sprang upward, grew into a spire, yearning higher until its uppermost tip was half invisible against the morning skies, gave him the first sense of the transiency and unimportance of the campus figures except as holders of the apostolic succession. He liked knowing that Gothic architecture, with its upward trend, was peculiarly appropriate to universities, and the idea became personal to him. The silent stretches of green, the quiet halls with an occasional late-burning scholastic light held his imagination in a strong grasp, and the chastity of the spire became a symbol of this perception.	Architecture that points upward felt especially right for universities, and he connected with that idea personally.

its upward trend	The tower that in view of his window sprang upward, grew into a spire, yearning higher until its uppermost tip was half invisible against the morning skies, gave him the first sense of the transiency and unimportance of the campus figures except as holders of the apostolic succession. He liked knowing that Gothic architecture, with its upward trend, was peculiarly appropriate to universities, and the idea became personal to him. The silent stretches of green, the quiet halls with an occasional late-burning scholastic light held his imagination in a strong grasp, and the chastity of the spire became a symbol of this perception.	its rising shape

a strong grasp	He liked knowing that Gothic architecture, with its upward trend, was peculiarly appropriate to universities, and the idea became personal to him. The silent stretches of green, the quiet halls with an occasional late-burning scholastic light held his imagination in a strong grasp, and the chastity of the spire became a symbol of this perception. “Damn it all,” he whispered aloud, wetting his hands in the damp and running them through his hair.	a firm hold

an occasional late-burning scholastic light	He liked knowing that Gothic architecture, with its upward trend, was peculiarly appropriate to universities, and the idea became personal to him. The silent stretches of green, the quiet halls with an occasional late-burning scholastic light held his imagination in a strong grasp, and the chastity of the spire became a symbol of this perception. “Damn it all,” he whispered aloud, wetting his hands in the damp and running them through his hair.	a light on late where someone is studying

stretches of green, the quiet halls with an occasional late-burning scholastic light held his imagination in a strong grasp, and the chastity of the spire became a symbol of this perception.	He liked knowing that Gothic architecture, with its upward trend, was peculiarly appropriate to universities, and the idea became personal to him. The silent stretches of green, the quiet halls with an occasional late-burning scholastic light held his imagination in a strong grasp, and the chastity of the spire became a symbol of this perception. “Damn it all,” he whispered aloud, wetting his hands in the damp and running them through his hair.	Expanses of grass, quiet buildings with a light on late at night, captivated him, and the spire's purity symbolized his feelings.

it all,” he whispered aloud, wetting his hands in the damp and running them through his hair.	The silent stretches of green, the quiet halls with an occasional late-burning scholastic light held his imagination in a strong grasp, and the chastity of the spire became a symbol of this perception. “Damn it all,” he whispered aloud, wetting his hands in the damp and running them through his hair. “Next year I work!”	it all,” he whispered, wetting his hands and running them through his hair.

spirit of spires and towers made him dreamily acquiescent, it would then overawe him.	“Next year I work!” Yet he knew that where now the spirit of spires and towers made him dreamily acquiescent, it would then overawe him. Where now he realized only his own inconsequence, effort would make him aware of his own impotency and insufficiency.	the inspiring atmosphere of the university makes him passively agreeable, work will intimidate him.

his own impotency	Yet he knew that where now the spirit of spires and towers made him dreamily acquiescent, it would then overawe him. Where now he realized only his own inconsequence, effort would make him aware of his own impotency and insufficiency. The college dreamed on—awake.	his own powerlessness

make him aware of his own impotency and insufficiency.	Yet he knew that where now the spirit of spires and towers made him dreamily acquiescent, it would then overawe him. Where now he realized only his own inconsequence, effort would make him aware of his own impotency and insufficiency. The college dreamed on—awake.	make him realize he was powerless and inadequate.

only his own inconsequence	Yet he knew that where now the spirit of spires and towers made him dreamily acquiescent, it would then overawe him. Where now he realized only his own inconsequence, effort would make him aware of his own impotency and insufficiency. The college dreamed on—awake.	only how unimportant he was

dreamed on—awake.	Where now he realized only his own inconsequence, effort would make him aware of his own impotency and insufficiency. The college dreamed on—awake. He felt a nervous excitement that might have been the very throb of its slow heart.	continued to dream, yet was awake.

the very throb	The college dreamed on—awake. He felt a nervous excitement that might have been the very throb of its slow heart. It was a stream where he was to throw a stone whose faint ripple would be vanishing almost as it left his hand.	the heartbeat

excitement that might have been the very throb of its slow heart.	The college dreamed on—awake. He felt a nervous excitement that might have been the very throb of its slow heart. It was a stream where he was to throw a stone whose faint ripple would be vanishing almost as it left his hand.	excitement that felt like the college's heartbeat.

whose faint ripple	He felt a nervous excitement that might have been the very throb of its slow heart. It was a stream where he was to throw a stone whose faint ripple would be vanishing almost as it left his hand. As yet he had given nothing, he had taken nothing.	its small wave

stream where he was to throw a stone whose faint ripple would be vanishing almost as it left his hand.	He felt a nervous excitement that might have been the very throb of its slow heart. It was a stream where he was to throw a stone whose faint ripple would be vanishing almost as it left his hand. As yet he had given nothing, he had taken nothing.	a situation where his small action would have an almost immediate and unnoticeable impact.

A belated freshman	As yet he had given nothing, he had taken nothing. A belated freshman, his oilskin slicker rasping loudly, slushed along the soft path. A voice from somewhere called the inevitable formula, “Stick out your head!”	A late arriving new student.

slushed along the soft path.	As yet he had given nothing, he had taken nothing. A belated freshman, his oilskin slicker rasping loudly, slushed along the soft path. A voice from somewhere called the inevitable formula, “Stick out your head!”	Walked through the muddy path.

the inevitable formula	A belated freshman, his oilskin slicker rasping loudly, slushed along the soft path. A voice from somewhere called the inevitable formula, “Stick out your head!” below an unseen window.	the usual thing to say

voice from somewhere called the inevitable formula, “Stick out your head!”	A belated freshman, his oilskin slicker rasping loudly, slushed along the soft path. A voice from somewhere called the inevitable formula, “Stick out your head!” below an unseen window.	Someone's voice called out, "Stick out your head!"

an unseen window	A voice from somewhere called the inevitable formula, “Stick out your head!” below an unseen window. A hundred little sounds of the current drifting on under the fog pressed in finally on his consciousness.	a window you can't see

sounds of the current drifting on under the fog pressed in finally on his consciousness.	below an unseen window. A hundred little sounds of the current drifting on under the fog pressed in finally on his consciousness. “Oh, God!”	The sounds of the water flowing under the fog finally became clear to him.

started at the sound of his voice in the stillness.	“Oh, God!” he cried suddenly, and started at the sound of his voice in the stillness. The rain dripped on.	was startled by the sound of his own voice in the quiet.

lay without moving, his hands clinched.	The rain dripped on. A minute longer he lay without moving, his hands clinched. Then he sprang to his feet and gave his clothes a tentative pat.	stayed still, his fists clenched.

sprang to his feet and gave his clothes a tentative pat.	A minute longer he lay without moving, his hands clinched. Then he sprang to his feet and gave his clothes a tentative pat. “I’m very damn wet!”	jumped up and patted his clothes carefully.

a tentative pat	A minute longer he lay without moving, his hands clinched. Then he sprang to his feet and gave his clothes a tentative pat. “I’m very damn wet!”	a gentle pat

said aloud to the sundial.	“I’m very damn wet!” he said aloud to the sundial.	said to the sundial.

his freshman year	The war began in the summer following his freshman year. Beyond a sporting interest in the German dash for Paris the whole affair failed either to thrill or interest him.	his first year of college

began in the summer following his freshman year.	The war began in the summer following his freshman year. Beyond a sporting interest in the German dash for Paris the whole affair failed either to thrill or interest him.	started the summer after his first year of college.

dash for Paris the whole affair failed either to thrill or interest him.	The war began in the summer following his freshman year. Beyond a sporting interest in the German dash for Paris the whole affair failed either to thrill or interest him. With the attitude he might have held toward an amusing melodrama he hoped it would be long and bloody.	the German advance toward Paris didn't excite or concern him at all.

an amusing melodrama	Beyond a sporting interest in the German dash for Paris the whole affair failed either to thrill or interest him. With the attitude he might have held toward an amusing melodrama he hoped it would be long and bloody. If it had not continued he would have felt like an irate ticket-holder at a prizefight where the principals refused to mix it up.	an entertaining show

held toward an amusing melodrama he hoped it would be long and bloody.	Beyond a sporting interest in the German dash for Paris the whole affair failed either to thrill or interest him. With the attitude he might have held toward an amusing melodrama he hoped it would be long and bloody. If it had not continued he would have felt like an irate ticket-holder at a prizefight where the principals refused to mix it up.	he hoped it would be long and bloody, like he was watching an entertaining show.

an irate ticket-holder	With the attitude he might have held toward an amusing melodrama he hoped it would be long and bloody. If it had not continued he would have felt like an irate ticket-holder at a prizefight where the principals refused to mix it up. That was his total reaction.	an angry ticket buyer

prizefight where the principals refused to mix it up.	With the attitude he might have held toward an amusing melodrama he hoped it would be long and bloody. If it had not continued he would have felt like an irate ticket-holder at a prizefight where the principals refused to mix it up. That was his total reaction.	boxing match where the fighters wouldn't fight.

 “All right, ponies	“All right, ponies!” “Shake it up!”	Alright, everyone!

“Hey, ponies	“Shake it up!” “Hey, ponies—how about easing up on that crap game and shaking a mean hip?” “Hey, ponies!”	Hey, guys!

ponies—how about easing up on that crap game and shaking a mean hip?”	“Shake it up!” “Hey, ponies—how about easing up on that crap game and shaking a mean hip?” “Hey, ponies!”	Hey, guys, how about stopping that dice game and dancing?

“Hey, ponies	“Hey, ponies—how about easing up on that crap game and shaking a mean hip?” “Hey, ponies!” The coach fumed helplessly, the Triangle Club president, glowering with anxiety, varied between furious bursts of authority and fits of temperamental lassitude, when he sat spiritless and wondered how the devil the show was ever going on tour by Christmas.	Hey, guys

fits of temperamental lassitude, when he sat spiritless and wondered how the devil the show was ever going on tour by Christmas.	“Hey, ponies!” The coach fumed helplessly, the Triangle Club president, glowering with anxiety, varied between furious bursts of authority and fits of temperamental lassitude, when he sat spiritless and wondered how the devil the show was ever going on tour by Christmas. “All right.	periods of being lazy and moody, when he felt drained and questioned how the show would ever be ready for tour by Christmas.

furious bursts	“Hey, ponies!” The coach fumed helplessly, the Triangle Club president, glowering with anxiety, varied between furious bursts of authority and fits of temperamental lassitude, when he sat spiritless and wondered how the devil the show was ever going on tour by Christmas. “All right.	angry outbursts

temperamental lassitude	“Hey, ponies!” The coach fumed helplessly, the Triangle Club president, glowering with anxiety, varied between furious bursts of authority and fits of temperamental lassitude, when he sat spiritless and wondered how the devil the show was ever going on tour by Christmas. “All right.	moody tiredness

the pirate song	“All right. We’ll take the pirate song.” The ponies took last drags at their cigarettes and slumped into place; the leading lady rushed into the foreground, setting his hands and feet in an atmospheric mince; and as the coach clapped and stamped and tumped and da-da’d, they hashed out a dance.	the pirate song

drags at their cigarettes and slumped into place; the leading lady rushed into the foreground, setting his hands and feet in an atmospheric mince; and as the coach clapped and stamped and tumped and da-da’d, they hashed out a dance.	We’ll take the pirate song.” The ponies took last drags at their cigarettes and slumped into place; the leading lady rushed into the foreground, setting his hands and feet in an atmospheric mince; and as the coach clapped and stamped and tumped and da-da’d, they hashed out a dance. A great, seething anthill was the Triangle Club.	took final puffs of their cigarettes and relaxed into position; the lead dancer hurried forward, carefully placing his hands and feet in a dramatic way; and as the coach clapped and stomped, they quickly put together a dance.

an atmospheric mince	We’ll take the pirate song.” The ponies took last drags at their cigarettes and slumped into place; the leading lady rushed into the foreground, setting his hands and feet in an atmospheric mince; and as the coach clapped and stamped and tumped and da-da’d, they hashed out a dance. A great, seething anthill was the Triangle Club.	A delicate and suggestive movement.

A great, seething anthill	The ponies took last drags at their cigarettes and slumped into place; the leading lady rushed into the foreground, setting his hands and feet in an atmospheric mince; and as the coach clapped and stamped and tumped and da-da’d, they hashed out a dance. A great, seething anthill was the Triangle Club. It gave a musical comedy every year, travelling with cast, chorus, orchestra, and scenery all through Christmas vacation.	A busy, bustling hive of activity

gave a musical comedy every year, travelling with cast, chorus, orchestra, and scenery all through Christmas vacation.	A great, seething anthill was the Triangle Club. It gave a musical comedy every year, travelling with cast, chorus, orchestra, and scenery all through Christmas vacation. The play and music were the work of undergraduates, and the club itself was the most influential of institutions, over three hundred men competing for it every year.	put on a musical comedy each year, taking the cast, chorus, orchestra, and sets on tour during Christmas break.

club itself was the most influential of institutions, over three hundred men competing for it every year.	It gave a musical comedy every year, travelling with cast, chorus, orchestra, and scenery all through Christmas vacation. The play and music were the work of undergraduates, and the club itself was the most influential of institutions, over three hundred men competing for it every year. Amory, after an easy victory in the first sophomore Princetonian competition, stepped into a vacancy of the cast as Boiling Oil, a Pirate Lieutenant.	The club was very popular, with over 300 people trying to join each year.

Princetonian competition	The play and music were the work of undergraduates, and the club itself was the most influential of institutions, over three hundred men competing for it every year. Amory, after an easy victory in the first sophomore Princetonian competition, stepped into a vacancy of the cast as Boiling Oil, a Pirate Lieutenant. Every night for the last week they had rehearsed Ha-Ha Hortense!	Princeton University competition

sophomore Princetonian competition, stepped into a vacancy of the cast as Boiling Oil, a Pirate Lieutenant.	The play and music were the work of undergraduates, and the club itself was the most influential of institutions, over three hundred men competing for it every year. Amory, after an easy victory in the first sophomore Princetonian competition, stepped into a vacancy of the cast as Boiling Oil, a Pirate Lieutenant. Every night for the last week they had rehearsed Ha-Ha Hortense!	a competition for second-year students at Princeton, and got a part in the play as Boiling Oil, a pirate officer, because someone else had dropped out.

the first sophomore	The play and music were the work of undergraduates, and the club itself was the most influential of institutions, over three hundred men competing for it every year. Amory, after an easy victory in the first sophomore Princetonian competition, stepped into a vacancy of the cast as Boiling Oil, a Pirate Lieutenant. Every night for the last week they had rehearsed Ha-Ha Hortense!	the first competition for sophomores

a Pirate Lieutenant	The play and music were the work of undergraduates, and the club itself was the most influential of institutions, over three hundred men competing for it every year. Amory, after an easy victory in the first sophomore Princetonian competition, stepped into a vacancy of the cast as Boiling Oil, a Pirate Lieutenant. Every night for the last week they had rehearsed Ha-Ha Hortense!	a pirate officer

Ha-Ha Hortense	Amory, after an easy victory in the first sophomore Princetonian competition, stepped into a vacancy of the cast as Boiling Oil, a Pirate Lieutenant. Every night for the last week they had rehearsed Ha-Ha Hortense! in the Casino, from two in the afternoon until eight in the morning, sustained by dark and powerful coffee, and sleeping in lectures through the interim.	Ha-Ha Hortense

rehearsed Ha-Ha Hortense!	Amory, after an easy victory in the first sophomore Princetonian competition, stepped into a vacancy of the cast as Boiling Oil, a Pirate Lieutenant. Every night for the last week they had rehearsed Ha-Ha Hortense! in the Casino, from two in the afternoon until eight in the morning, sustained by dark and powerful coffee, and sleeping in lectures through the interim.	Practiced the play "Ha-Ha Hortense!"

from two in the afternoon until eight in the morning, sustained by dark and powerful coffee, and sleeping in lectures through the interim.	Every night for the last week they had rehearsed Ha-Ha Hortense! in the Casino, from two in the afternoon until eight in the morning, sustained by dark and powerful coffee, and sleeping in lectures through the interim. A rare scene, the Casino.	from 2 PM to 8 AM, fueled by strong coffee, and sleeping through classes in between.

the cheerful tumpty-tump	A rare scene, the Casino. A big, barnlike auditorium, dotted with boys as girls, boys as pirates, boys as babies; the scenery in course of being violently set up; the spotlight man rehearsing by throwing weird shafts into angry eyes; over all the constant tuning of the orchestra or the cheerful tumpty-tump of a Triangle tune. The boy who writes the lyrics stands in the corner, biting a pencil, with twenty minutes to think of an encore; the business manager argues with the secretary as to how much money can be spent on “those damn milkmaid costumes”; the old graduate, president in ninety-eight, perches on a box and thinks how much simpler it was in his day.	the happy "tumpty-tump"

A big, barnlike auditorium	A rare scene, the Casino. A big, barnlike auditorium, dotted with boys as girls, boys as pirates, boys as babies; the scenery in course of being violently set up; the spotlight man rehearsing by throwing weird shafts into angry eyes; over all the constant tuning of the orchestra or the cheerful tumpty-tump of a Triangle tune. The boy who writes the lyrics stands in the corner, biting a pencil, with twenty minutes to think of an encore; the business manager argues with the secretary as to how much money can be spent on “those damn milkmaid costumes”; the old graduate, president in ninety-eight, perches on a box and thinks how much simpler it was in his day.	A large, barn-like hall

course of being violently set up; the spotlight man rehearsing by throwing weird shafts into angry eyes; over all the constant tuning of the orchestra or the cheerful tumpty-tump of a Triangle tune.	A rare scene, the Casino. A big, barnlike auditorium, dotted with boys as girls, boys as pirates, boys as babies; the scenery in course of being violently set up; the spotlight man rehearsing by throwing weird shafts into angry eyes; over all the constant tuning of the orchestra or the cheerful tumpty-tump of a Triangle tune. The boy who writes the lyrics stands in the corner, biting a pencil, with twenty minutes to think of an encore; the business manager argues with the secretary as to how much money can be spent on “those damn milkmaid costumes”; the old graduate, president in ninety-eight, perches on a box and thinks how much simpler it was in his day.	being quickly and roughly set up; the spotlight operator practicing by shining strange lights into annoyed eyes; and the constant tuning of the orchestra or the cheerful sound of a triangle playing.

perches on a box and thinks how much simpler it was in his day.	A big, barnlike auditorium, dotted with boys as girls, boys as pirates, boys as babies; the scenery in course of being violently set up; the spotlight man rehearsing by throwing weird shafts into angry eyes; over all the constant tuning of the orchestra or the cheerful tumpty-tump of a Triangle tune. The boy who writes the lyrics stands in the corner, biting a pencil, with twenty minutes to think of an encore; the business manager argues with the secretary as to how much money can be spent on “those damn milkmaid costumes”; the old graduate, president in ninety-eight, perches on a box and thinks how much simpler it was in his day. How a Triangle show ever got off was a mystery, but it was a riotous mystery, anyway, whether or not one did enough service to wear a little gold Triangle on his watch-chain.	sits on a box and thinks about how much easier things were back then.

those damn milkmaid costumes	A big, barnlike auditorium, dotted with boys as girls, boys as pirates, boys as babies; the scenery in course of being violently set up; the spotlight man rehearsing by throwing weird shafts into angry eyes; over all the constant tuning of the orchestra or the cheerful tumpty-tump of a Triangle tune. The boy who writes the lyrics stands in the corner, biting a pencil, with twenty minutes to think of an encore; the business manager argues with the secretary as to how much money can be spent on “those damn milkmaid costumes”; the old graduate, president in ninety-eight, perches on a box and thinks how much simpler it was in his day. How a Triangle show ever got off was a mystery, but it was a riotous mystery, anyway, whether or not one did enough service to wear a little gold Triangle on his watch-chain.	those annoying milkmaid outfits

did enough service to wear a little gold Triangle on his watch-chain.	The boy who writes the lyrics stands in the corner, biting a pencil, with twenty minutes to think of an encore; the business manager argues with the secretary as to how much money can be spent on “those damn milkmaid costumes”; the old graduate, president in ninety-eight, perches on a box and thinks how much simpler it was in his day. How a Triangle show ever got off was a mystery, but it was a riotous mystery, anyway, whether or not one did enough service to wear a little gold Triangle on his watch-chain. Ha-Ha Hortense! was written over six times and had the names of nine collaborators on the programme.	deserved to wear a small gold Triangle on his watch chain.

a riotous mystery	The boy who writes the lyrics stands in the corner, biting a pencil, with twenty minutes to think of an encore; the business manager argues with the secretary as to how much money can be spent on “those damn milkmaid costumes”; the old graduate, president in ninety-eight, perches on a box and thinks how much simpler it was in his day. How a Triangle show ever got off was a mystery, but it was a riotous mystery, anyway, whether or not one did enough service to wear a little gold Triangle on his watch-chain. Ha-Ha Hortense! was written over six times and had the names of nine collaborators on the programme.	a chaotic puzzle

collaborators on the programme.	How a Triangle show ever got off was a mystery, but it was a riotous mystery, anyway, whether or not one did enough service to wear a little gold Triangle on his watch-chain. Ha-Ha Hortense! was written over six times and had the names of nine collaborators on the programme. All Triangle shows started by being “something different—not just a regular musical comedy,” but when the several authors, the president, the coach and the faculty committee finished with it, there remained just the old reliable Triangle show with the old reliable jokes and the star comedian who got expelled or sick or something just before the trip, and the dark-whiskered man in the pony-ballet, who “absolutely won’t shave twice a day, doggone it!”	people working together on the show.

Ha-Ha Hortense	How a Triangle show ever got off was a mystery, but it was a riotous mystery, anyway, whether or not one did enough service to wear a little gold Triangle on his watch-chain. Ha-Ha Hortense! was written over six times and had the names of nine collaborators on the programme. All Triangle shows started by being “something different—not just a regular musical comedy,” but when the several authors, the president, the coach and the faculty committee finished with it, there remained just the old reliable Triangle show with the old reliable jokes and the star comedian who got expelled or sick or something just before the trip, and the dark-whiskered man in the pony-ballet, who “absolutely won’t shave twice a day, doggone it!”	Ha-Ha Hortense

nine collaborators	How a Triangle show ever got off was a mystery, but it was a riotous mystery, anyway, whether or not one did enough service to wear a little gold Triangle on his watch-chain. Ha-Ha Hortense! was written over six times and had the names of nine collaborators on the programme. All Triangle shows started by being “something different—not just a regular musical comedy,” but when the several authors, the president, the coach and the faculty committee finished with it, there remained just the old reliable Triangle show with the old reliable jokes and the star comedian who got expelled or sick or something just before the trip, and the dark-whiskered man in the pony-ballet, who “absolutely won’t shave twice a day, doggone it!”	nine writers

just a regular musical comedy	Ha-Ha Hortense! was written over six times and had the names of nine collaborators on the programme. All Triangle shows started by being “something different—not just a regular musical comedy,” but when the several authors, the president, the coach and the faculty committee finished with it, there remained just the old reliable Triangle show with the old reliable jokes and the star comedian who got expelled or sick or something just before the trip, and the dark-whiskered man in the pony-ballet, who “absolutely won’t shave twice a day, doggone it!” There was one brilliant place in Ha-Ha Hortense!	just a typical musical comedy

the star comedian	Ha-Ha Hortense! was written over six times and had the names of nine collaborators on the programme. All Triangle shows started by being “something different—not just a regular musical comedy,” but when the several authors, the president, the coach and the faculty committee finished with it, there remained just the old reliable Triangle show with the old reliable jokes and the star comedian who got expelled or sick or something just before the trip, and the dark-whiskered man in the pony-ballet, who “absolutely won’t shave twice a day, doggone it!” There was one brilliant place in Ha-Ha Hortense!	the main funny actor

the pony-ballet	Ha-Ha Hortense! was written over six times and had the names of nine collaborators on the programme. All Triangle shows started by being “something different—not just a regular musical comedy,” but when the several authors, the president, the coach and the faculty committee finished with it, there remained just the old reliable Triangle show with the old reliable jokes and the star comedian who got expelled or sick or something just before the trip, and the dark-whiskered man in the pony-ballet, who “absolutely won’t shave twice a day, doggone it!” There was one brilliant place in Ha-Ha Hortense!	a ballet with men dressed as ponies

the dark-whiskered man	Ha-Ha Hortense! was written over six times and had the names of nine collaborators on the programme. All Triangle shows started by being “something different—not just a regular musical comedy,” but when the several authors, the president, the coach and the faculty committee finished with it, there remained just the old reliable Triangle show with the old reliable jokes and the star comedian who got expelled or sick or something just before the trip, and the dark-whiskered man in the pony-ballet, who “absolutely won’t shave twice a day, doggone it!” There was one brilliant place in Ha-Ha Hortense!	the man with dark whiskers

started by being “something different—not just a regular musical comedy,” but when the several authors, the president, the coach and the faculty committee finished with it, there remained just the old reliable Triangle show with the old reliable jokes and the star comedian who got expelled or sick or something just before the trip, and the dark-whiskered man in the pony-ballet, who “absolutely won’t shave twice a day, doggone it!”	Ha-Ha Hortense! was written over six times and had the names of nine collaborators on the programme. All Triangle shows started by being “something different—not just a regular musical comedy,” but when the several authors, the president, the coach and the faculty committee finished with it, there remained just the old reliable Triangle show with the old reliable jokes and the star comedian who got expelled or sick or something just before the trip, and the dark-whiskered man in the pony-ballet, who “absolutely won’t shave twice a day, doggone it!” There was one brilliant place in Ha-Ha Hortense!	It began as "something different—not just a typical musical comedy," but after the writers, president, coach, and faculty committee got involved, it ended up being the same old Triangle show with the same old jokes, the star comedian getting kicked out or sick right before the trip, and the hairy guy in the pony ballet who refused to shave twice a day.

just the old reliable Triangle show	Ha-Ha Hortense! was written over six times and had the names of nine collaborators on the programme. All Triangle shows started by being “something different—not just a regular musical comedy,” but when the several authors, the president, the coach and the faculty committee finished with it, there remained just the old reliable Triangle show with the old reliable jokes and the star comedian who got expelled or sick or something just before the trip, and the dark-whiskered man in the pony-ballet, who “absolutely won’t shave twice a day, doggone it!” There was one brilliant place in Ha-Ha Hortense!	just the same old Triangle show

place in Ha-Ha Hortense!	All Triangle shows started by being “something different—not just a regular musical comedy,” but when the several authors, the president, the coach and the faculty committee finished with it, there remained just the old reliable Triangle show with the old reliable jokes and the star comedian who got expelled or sick or something just before the trip, and the dark-whiskered man in the pony-ballet, who “absolutely won’t shave twice a day, doggone it!” There was one brilliant place in Ha-Ha Hortense! It is a Princeton tradition that whenever a Yale man who is a member of the widely advertised Skull and Bones hears the sacred name mentioned, he must leave the room.	a good part in "Ha-Ha Hortense!"

Ha-Ha Hortense	All Triangle shows started by being “something different—not just a regular musical comedy,” but when the several authors, the president, the coach and the faculty committee finished with it, there remained just the old reliable Triangle show with the old reliable jokes and the star comedian who got expelled or sick or something just before the trip, and the dark-whiskered man in the pony-ballet, who “absolutely won’t shave twice a day, doggone it!” There was one brilliant place in Ha-Ha Hortense! It is a Princeton tradition that whenever a Yale man who is a member of the widely advertised Skull and Bones hears the sacred name mentioned, he must leave the room.	Ha-Ha Hortense

the widely advertised Skull	There was one brilliant place in Ha-Ha Hortense! It is a Princeton tradition that whenever a Yale man who is a member of the widely advertised Skull and Bones hears the sacred name mentioned, he must leave the room. It is also a tradition that the members are invariably successful in later life, amassing fortunes or votes or coupons or whatever they choose to amass.	the well-known Skull

tradition that whenever a Yale man who is a member of the widely advertised Skull and Bones hears the sacred name mentioned, he must leave the room.	There was one brilliant place in Ha-Ha Hortense! It is a Princeton tradition that whenever a Yale man who is a member of the widely advertised Skull and Bones hears the sacred name mentioned, he must leave the room. It is also a tradition that the members are invariably successful in later life, amassing fortunes or votes or coupons or whatever they choose to amass.	tradition that when a Yale Skull and Bones member hears the group's name, he has to leave the room.

are invariably successful in later life, amassing fortunes or votes or coupons or whatever they choose to amass.	It is a Princeton tradition that whenever a Yale man who is a member of the widely advertised Skull and Bones hears the sacred name mentioned, he must leave the room. It is also a tradition that the members are invariably successful in later life, amassing fortunes or votes or coupons or whatever they choose to amass. Therefore, at each performance of Ha-Ha Hortense! half-a-dozen seats were kept from sale and occupied by six of the worst-looking vagabonds that could be hired from the streets, further touched up by the Triangle makeup man.	are always successful later in life, accumulating wealth, votes, coupons, or anything else they want.

the worst-looking vagabonds	It is also a tradition that the members are invariably successful in later life, amassing fortunes or votes or coupons or whatever they choose to amass. Therefore, at each performance of Ha-Ha Hortense! half-a-dozen seats were kept from sale and occupied by six of the worst-looking vagabonds that could be hired from the streets, further touched up by the Triangle makeup man. At the moment in the show where Firebrand, the Pirate Chief, pointed at his black flag and said, “I am a Yale graduate—note my Skull and Bones!”—at this very moment the six vagabonds were instructed to rise conspicuously and leave the theatre with looks of deep melancholy and an injured dignity.	the shabbiest-looking homeless people

Ha-Ha Hortense	It is also a tradition that the members are invariably successful in later life, amassing fortunes or votes or coupons or whatever they choose to amass. Therefore, at each performance of Ha-Ha Hortense! half-a-dozen seats were kept from sale and occupied by six of the worst-looking vagabonds that could be hired from the streets, further touched up by the Triangle makeup man. At the moment in the show where Firebrand, the Pirate Chief, pointed at his black flag and said, “I am a Yale graduate—note my Skull and Bones!”—at this very moment the six vagabonds were instructed to rise conspicuously and leave the theatre with looks of deep melancholy and an injured dignity.	Ha-Ha Hortense

hired from the streets, further touched up by the Triangle makeup man.	It is also a tradition that the members are invariably successful in later life, amassing fortunes or votes or coupons or whatever they choose to amass. Therefore, at each performance of Ha-Ha Hortense! half-a-dozen seats were kept from sale and occupied by six of the worst-looking vagabonds that could be hired from the streets, further touched up by the Triangle makeup man. At the moment in the show where Firebrand, the Pirate Chief, pointed at his black flag and said, “I am a Yale graduate—note my Skull and Bones!”—at this very moment the six vagabonds were instructed to rise conspicuously and leave the theatre with looks of deep melancholy and an injured dignity.	hired from the streets and given extra makeup by the Triangle's makeup artist.

the six vagabonds	Therefore, at each performance of Ha-Ha Hortense! half-a-dozen seats were kept from sale and occupied by six of the worst-looking vagabonds that could be hired from the streets, further touched up by the Triangle makeup man. At the moment in the show where Firebrand, the Pirate Chief, pointed at his black flag and said, “I am a Yale graduate—note my Skull and Bones!”—at this very moment the six vagabonds were instructed to rise conspicuously and leave the theatre with looks of deep melancholy and an injured dignity. It was claimed though never proved that on one occasion the hired Elis were swelled by one of the real thing.	the six homeless people

leave the theatre with looks of deep melancholy and an injured dignity.	Therefore, at each performance of Ha-Ha Hortense! half-a-dozen seats were kept from sale and occupied by six of the worst-looking vagabonds that could be hired from the streets, further touched up by the Triangle makeup man. At the moment in the show where Firebrand, the Pirate Chief, pointed at his black flag and said, “I am a Yale graduate—note my Skull and Bones!”—at this very moment the six vagabonds were instructed to rise conspicuously and leave the theatre with looks of deep melancholy and an injured dignity. It was claimed though never proved that on one occasion the hired Elis were swelled by one of the real thing.	walk out of the theater looking sad and offended.

the Pirate Chief	Therefore, at each performance of Ha-Ha Hortense! half-a-dozen seats were kept from sale and occupied by six of the worst-looking vagabonds that could be hired from the streets, further touched up by the Triangle makeup man. At the moment in the show where Firebrand, the Pirate Chief, pointed at his black flag and said, “I am a Yale graduate—note my Skull and Bones!”—at this very moment the six vagabonds were instructed to rise conspicuously and leave the theatre with looks of deep melancholy and an injured dignity. It was claimed though never proved that on one occasion the hired Elis were swelled by one of the real thing.	the pirate chief

an injured dignity	Therefore, at each performance of Ha-Ha Hortense! half-a-dozen seats were kept from sale and occupied by six of the worst-looking vagabonds that could be hired from the streets, further touched up by the Triangle makeup man. At the moment in the show where Firebrand, the Pirate Chief, pointed at his black flag and said, “I am a Yale graduate—note my Skull and Bones!”—at this very moment the six vagabonds were instructed to rise conspicuously and leave the theatre with looks of deep melancholy and an injured dignity. It was claimed though never proved that on one occasion the hired Elis were swelled by one of the real thing.	a sense of wounded pride

swelled by one of the real thing.	At the moment in the show where Firebrand, the Pirate Chief, pointed at his black flag and said, “I am a Yale graduate—note my Skull and Bones!”—at this very moment the six vagabonds were instructed to rise conspicuously and leave the theatre with looks of deep melancholy and an injured dignity. It was claimed though never proved that on one occasion the hired Elis were swelled by one of the real thing. They played through vacation to the fashionable of eight cities.	joined by a genuine Yale student.

the hired Elis	At the moment in the show where Firebrand, the Pirate Chief, pointed at his black flag and said, “I am a Yale graduate—note my Skull and Bones!”—at this very moment the six vagabonds were instructed to rise conspicuously and leave the theatre with looks of deep melancholy and an injured dignity. It was claimed though never proved that on one occasion the hired Elis were swelled by one of the real thing. They played through vacation to the fashionable of eight cities.	the paid Yale students

fashionable of eight cities.	It was claimed though never proved that on one occasion the hired Elis were swelled by one of the real thing. They played through vacation to the fashionable of eight cities. Amory liked Louisville and Memphis best: these knew how to meet strangers, furnished extraordinary punch, and flaunted an astonishing array of feminine beauty.	wealthy people in eight cities.

furnished extraordinary punch	They played through vacation to the fashionable of eight cities. Amory liked Louisville and Memphis best: these knew how to meet strangers, furnished extraordinary punch, and flaunted an astonishing array of feminine beauty. Chicago he approved for a certain verve that transcended its loud accent—however, it was a Yale town, and as the Yale Glee Club was expected in a week the Triangle received only divided homage.	served amazing drinks

feminine beauty	They played through vacation to the fashionable of eight cities. Amory liked Louisville and Memphis best: these knew how to meet strangers, furnished extraordinary punch, and flaunted an astonishing array of feminine beauty. Chicago he approved for a certain verve that transcended its loud accent—however, it was a Yale town, and as the Yale Glee Club was expected in a week the Triangle received only divided homage.	beautiful women

an astonishing array	They played through vacation to the fashionable of eight cities. Amory liked Louisville and Memphis best: these knew how to meet strangers, furnished extraordinary punch, and flaunted an astonishing array of feminine beauty. Chicago he approved for a certain verve that transcended its loud accent—however, it was a Yale town, and as the Yale Glee Club was expected in a week the Triangle received only divided homage.	a surprising amount

array of feminine beauty.	They played through vacation to the fashionable of eight cities. Amory liked Louisville and Memphis best: these knew how to meet strangers, furnished extraordinary punch, and flaunted an astonishing array of feminine beauty. Chicago he approved for a certain verve that transcended its loud accent—however, it was a Yale town, and as the Yale Glee Club was expected in a week the Triangle received only divided homage.	A lot of beautiful women.

the Yale Glee Club	Amory liked Louisville and Memphis best: these knew how to meet strangers, furnished extraordinary punch, and flaunted an astonishing array of feminine beauty. Chicago he approved for a certain verve that transcended its loud accent—however, it was a Yale town, and as the Yale Glee Club was expected in a week the Triangle received only divided homage. In Baltimore, Princeton was at home, and everyone fell in love.	the Yale Glee Club

approved for a certain verve that transcended its loud accent—however, it was a Yale town, and as the Yale Glee Club was expected in a week the Triangle received only divided homage.	Amory liked Louisville and Memphis best: these knew how to meet strangers, furnished extraordinary punch, and flaunted an astonishing array of feminine beauty. Chicago he approved for a certain verve that transcended its loud accent—however, it was a Yale town, and as the Yale Glee Club was expected in a week the Triangle received only divided homage. In Baltimore, Princeton was at home, and everyone fell in love.	He liked Chicago for its energy that was more important than its rough style, but since it was a Yale town and the Yale Glee Club was arriving soon, the Triangle Club wasn't fully appreciated.

only divided homage	Amory liked Louisville and Memphis best: these knew how to meet strangers, furnished extraordinary punch, and flaunted an astonishing array of feminine beauty. Chicago he approved for a certain verve that transcended its loud accent—however, it was a Yale town, and as the Yale Glee Club was expected in a week the Triangle received only divided homage. In Baltimore, Princeton was at home, and everyone fell in love.	only partial respect

a certain verve	Amory liked Louisville and Memphis best: these knew how to meet strangers, furnished extraordinary punch, and flaunted an astonishing array of feminine beauty. Chicago he approved for a certain verve that transcended its loud accent—however, it was a Yale town, and as the Yale Glee Club was expected in a week the Triangle received only divided homage. In Baltimore, Princeton was at home, and everyone fell in love.	a certain energy

consumption of strong waters all along the line; one man invariably went on the stage highly stimulated, claiming that his particular interpretation of the part required it.	In Baltimore, Princeton was at home, and everyone fell in love. There was a proper consumption of strong waters all along the line; one man invariably went on the stage highly stimulated, claiming that his particular interpretation of the part required it. There were three private cars; however, no one slept except in the third car, which was called the “animal car,” and where were herded the spectacled windjammers of the orchestra.	Everyone was drinking heavily; one actor always went on stage drunk, insisting it improved his performance.

the spectacled windjammers	There was a proper consumption of strong waters all along the line; one man invariably went on the stage highly stimulated, claiming that his particular interpretation of the part required it. There were three private cars; however, no one slept except in the third car, which was called the “animal car,” and where were herded the spectacled windjammers of the orchestra. Everything was so hurried that there was no time to be bored, but when they arrived in Philadelphia, with vacation nearly over, there was rest in getting out of the heavy atmosphere of flowers and greasepaint, and the ponies took off their corsets with abdominal pains and sighs of relief.	the orchestra members

slept except in the third car, which was called the “animal car,” and where were herded the spectacled windjammers of the orchestra.	There was a proper consumption of strong waters all along the line; one man invariably went on the stage highly stimulated, claiming that his particular interpretation of the part required it. There were three private cars; however, no one slept except in the third car, which was called the “animal car,” and where were herded the spectacled windjammers of the orchestra. Everything was so hurried that there was no time to be bored, but when they arrived in Philadelphia, with vacation nearly over, there was rest in getting out of the heavy atmosphere of flowers and greasepaint, and the ponies took off their corsets with abdominal pains and sighs of relief.	slept except in the third car, nicknamed the "animal car," where the orchestra members with glasses were crammed together.

atmosphere of flowers and greasepaint, and the ponies took off their corsets with abdominal pains and sighs of relief.	There were three private cars; however, no one slept except in the third car, which was called the “animal car,” and where were herded the spectacled windjammers of the orchestra. Everything was so hurried that there was no time to be bored, but when they arrived in Philadelphia, with vacation nearly over, there was rest in getting out of the heavy atmosphere of flowers and greasepaint, and the ponies took off their corsets with abdominal pains and sighs of relief. When the disbanding came, Amory set out post haste for Minneapolis, for Sally Weatherby’s cousin, Isabelle Borgé, was coming to spend the winter in Minneapolis while her parents went abroad.	atmosphere of flowers and makeup, and the dancers took off their corsets, relieved but with stomach aches.

abdominal pains	There were three private cars; however, no one slept except in the third car, which was called the “animal car,” and where were herded the spectacled windjammers of the orchestra. Everything was so hurried that there was no time to be bored, but when they arrived in Philadelphia, with vacation nearly over, there was rest in getting out of the heavy atmosphere of flowers and greasepaint, and the ponies took off their corsets with abdominal pains and sighs of relief. When the disbanding came, Amory set out post haste for Minneapolis, for Sally Weatherby’s cousin, Isabelle Borgé, was coming to spend the winter in Minneapolis while her parents went abroad.	stomach cramps

Sally Weatherby’s cousin	Everything was so hurried that there was no time to be bored, but when they arrived in Philadelphia, with vacation nearly over, there was rest in getting out of the heavy atmosphere of flowers and greasepaint, and the ponies took off their corsets with abdominal pains and sighs of relief. When the disbanding came, Amory set out post haste for Minneapolis, for Sally Weatherby’s cousin, Isabelle Borgé, was coming to spend the winter in Minneapolis while her parents went abroad. He remembered Isabelle only as a little girl with whom he had played sometimes when he first went to Minneapolis.	Sally Weatherby's relative

post haste	Everything was so hurried that there was no time to be bored, but when they arrived in Philadelphia, with vacation nearly over, there was rest in getting out of the heavy atmosphere of flowers and greasepaint, and the ponies took off their corsets with abdominal pains and sighs of relief. When the disbanding came, Amory set out post haste for Minneapolis, for Sally Weatherby’s cousin, Isabelle Borgé, was coming to spend the winter in Minneapolis while her parents went abroad. He remembered Isabelle only as a little girl with whom he had played sometimes when he first went to Minneapolis.	very quickly

cousin, Isabelle Borgé, was coming to spend the winter in Minneapolis while her parents went abroad.	Everything was so hurried that there was no time to be bored, but when they arrived in Philadelphia, with vacation nearly over, there was rest in getting out of the heavy atmosphere of flowers and greasepaint, and the ponies took off their corsets with abdominal pains and sighs of relief. When the disbanding came, Amory set out post haste for Minneapolis, for Sally Weatherby’s cousin, Isabelle Borgé, was coming to spend the winter in Minneapolis while her parents went abroad. He remembered Isabelle only as a little girl with whom he had played sometimes when he first went to Minneapolis.	Isabelle Borgé, was coming to spend the winter in Minneapolis while her parents were traveling overseas.

girl with whom he had played sometimes when he first went to Minneapolis.	When the disbanding came, Amory set out post haste for Minneapolis, for Sally Weatherby’s cousin, Isabelle Borgé, was coming to spend the winter in Minneapolis while her parents went abroad. He remembered Isabelle only as a little girl with whom he had played sometimes when he first went to Minneapolis. She had gone to Baltimore to live—but since then she had developed a past.	girl he used to play with when he first moved to Minneapolis.

full stride	She had gone to Baltimore to live—but since then she had developed a past. Amory was in full stride, confident, nervous, and jubilant. Scurrying back to Minneapolis to see a girl he had known as a child seemed the interesting and romantic thing to do, so without compunction he wired his mother not to expect him.	at his peak

was in full stride, confident, nervous, and jubilant.	She had gone to Baltimore to live—but since then she had developed a past. Amory was in full stride, confident, nervous, and jubilant. Scurrying back to Minneapolis to see a girl he had known as a child seemed the interesting and romantic thing to do, so without compunction he wired his mother not to expect him.	was at his peak, confident, nervous, and joyful.

the interesting and romantic thing	Amory was in full stride, confident, nervous, and jubilant. Scurrying back to Minneapolis to see a girl he had known as a child seemed the interesting and romantic thing to do, so without compunction he wired his mother not to expect him. sat in the train, and thought about himself for thirty-six hours.	the exciting and romantic thing

thing to do, so without compunction he wired his mother not to expect him.	Amory was in full stride, confident, nervous, and jubilant. Scurrying back to Minneapolis to see a girl he had known as a child seemed the interesting and romantic thing to do, so without compunction he wired his mother not to expect him. sat in the train, and thought about himself for thirty-six hours.	the right thing to do, so he wired his mother not to expect him, without feeling guilty.

thought about himself for thirty-six hours.	Scurrying back to Minneapolis to see a girl he had known as a child seemed the interesting and romantic thing to do, so without compunction he wired his mother not to expect him. sat in the train, and thought about himself for thirty-six hours.	He spent thirty-six hours on the train, thinking about himself.

come into constant contact with that great current American phenomenon, the “petting party.”	On the Triangle trip Amory had come into constant contact with that great current American phenomenon, the “petting party.” None of the Victorian mothers—and most of the mothers were Victorian—had any idea how casually their daughters were accustomed to be kissed.	encountered frequently this popular new American trend, the "petting party."

that great current American phenomenon	On the Triangle trip Amory had come into constant contact with that great current American phenomenon, the “petting party.” None of the Victorian mothers—and most of the mothers were Victorian—had any idea how casually their daughters were accustomed to be kissed.	that common thing in America right now

most of the mothers were Victorian—had any idea how casually their daughters were accustomed to be kissed.	On the Triangle trip Amory had come into constant contact with that great current American phenomenon, the “petting party.” None of the Victorian mothers—and most of the mothers were Victorian—had any idea how casually their daughters were accustomed to be kissed. “Servant-girls are that way,” says Mrs. Huston-Carmelite to her popular daughter.	most mothers, who were old-fashioned, had no idea how easily their daughters were kissed.

Mrs. Huston-Carmelite	None of the Victorian mothers—and most of the mothers were Victorian—had any idea how casually their daughters were accustomed to be kissed. “Servant-girls are that way,” says Mrs. Huston-Carmelite to her popular daughter. “They are kissed first and proposed to afterward.”	Mrs. Huston-Carmelite

says Mrs. Huston-Carmelite to her popular daughter.	None of the Victorian mothers—and most of the mothers were Victorian—had any idea how casually their daughters were accustomed to be kissed. “Servant-girls are that way,” says Mrs. Huston-Carmelite to her popular daughter. “They are kissed first and proposed to afterward.”	Mrs. Huston-Carmelite tells her popular daughter.

match with young Hambell, of Cambell & Hambell, who fatuously considers himself her first love, and between engagements the P.D.	“They are kissed first and proposed to afterward.” But the Popular Daughter becomes engaged every six months between sixteen and twenty-two, when she arranges a match with young Hambell, of Cambell & Hambell, who fatuously considers himself her first love, and between engagements the P.D. (she is selected by the cut-in system at dances, which favors the survival of the fittest) has other sentimental last kisses in the moonlight, or the firelight, or the outer darkness.	marries young Hambell from the company Cambell & Hambell, who foolishly believes he's her first love, and between engagements the Popular Daughter

young Hambell	“They are kissed first and proposed to afterward.” But the Popular Daughter becomes engaged every six months between sixteen and twenty-two, when she arranges a match with young Hambell, of Cambell & Hambell, who fatuously considers himself her first love, and between engagements the P.D. (she is selected by the cut-in system at dances, which favors the survival of the fittest) has other sentimental last kisses in the moonlight, or the firelight, or the outer darkness.	young Hambell

survival of the fittest) has other sentimental last kisses in the moonlight, or the firelight, or the outer darkness.	But the Popular Daughter becomes engaged every six months between sixteen and twenty-two, when she arranges a match with young Hambell, of Cambell & Hambell, who fatuously considers himself her first love, and between engagements the P.D. (she is selected by the cut-in system at dances, which favors the survival of the fittest) has other sentimental last kisses in the moonlight, or the firelight, or the outer darkness. Amory saw girls doing things that even in his memory would have been impossible: eating three-o’clock, after-dance suppers in impossible cafés, talking of every side of life with an air half of earnestness, half of mockery, yet with a furtive excitement that Amory considered stood for a real moral letdown.	the most popular girl has other romantic farewell kisses in the moonlight, by the fire, or in a dark place.

other sentimental last kisses	But the Popular Daughter becomes engaged every six months between sixteen and twenty-two, when she arranges a match with young Hambell, of Cambell & Hambell, who fatuously considers himself her first love, and between engagements the P.D. (she is selected by the cut-in system at dances, which favors the survival of the fittest) has other sentimental last kisses in the moonlight, or the firelight, or the outer darkness. Amory saw girls doing things that even in his memory would have been impossible: eating three-o’clock, after-dance suppers in impossible cafés, talking of every side of life with an air half of earnestness, half of mockery, yet with a furtive excitement that Amory considered stood for a real moral letdown.	other emotionally charged final kisses

impossible cafés	(she is selected by the cut-in system at dances, which favors the survival of the fittest) has other sentimental last kisses in the moonlight, or the firelight, or the outer darkness. Amory saw girls doing things that even in his memory would have been impossible: eating three-o’clock, after-dance suppers in impossible cafés, talking of every side of life with an air half of earnestness, half of mockery, yet with a furtive excitement that Amory considered stood for a real moral letdown. But he never realized how widespread it was until he saw the cities between New York and Chicago as one vast juvenile intrigue.	unbelievable cafes

stood for a real moral letdown.	(she is selected by the cut-in system at dances, which favors the survival of the fittest) has other sentimental last kisses in the moonlight, or the firelight, or the outer darkness. Amory saw girls doing things that even in his memory would have been impossible: eating three-o’clock, after-dance suppers in impossible cafés, talking of every side of life with an air half of earnestness, half of mockery, yet with a furtive excitement that Amory considered stood for a real moral letdown. But he never realized how widespread it was until he saw the cities between New York and Chicago as one vast juvenile intrigue.	meant a real decline in morals.

a real moral letdown	(she is selected by the cut-in system at dances, which favors the survival of the fittest) has other sentimental last kisses in the moonlight, or the firelight, or the outer darkness. Amory saw girls doing things that even in his memory would have been impossible: eating three-o’clock, after-dance suppers in impossible cafés, talking of every side of life with an air half of earnestness, half of mockery, yet with a furtive excitement that Amory considered stood for a real moral letdown. But he never realized how widespread it was until he saw the cities between New York and Chicago as one vast juvenile intrigue.	a real decline in morals

a furtive excitement	(she is selected by the cut-in system at dances, which favors the survival of the fittest) has other sentimental last kisses in the moonlight, or the firelight, or the outer darkness. Amory saw girls doing things that even in his memory would have been impossible: eating three-o’clock, after-dance suppers in impossible cafés, talking of every side of life with an air half of earnestness, half of mockery, yet with a furtive excitement that Amory considered stood for a real moral letdown. But he never realized how widespread it was until he saw the cities between New York and Chicago as one vast juvenile intrigue.	a hidden thrill

was until he saw the cities between New York and Chicago as one vast juvenile intrigue.	Amory saw girls doing things that even in his memory would have been impossible: eating three-o’clock, after-dance suppers in impossible cafés, talking of every side of life with an air half of earnestness, half of mockery, yet with a furtive excitement that Amory considered stood for a real moral letdown. But he never realized how widespread it was until he saw the cities between New York and Chicago as one vast juvenile intrigue. Afternoon at the Plaza, with winter twilight hovering outside and faint drums downstairs.	He didn't realize how common it was until he saw the cities between New York and Chicago as a huge network of young people scheming and being secretive.

one vast juvenile intrigue	Amory saw girls doing things that even in his memory would have been impossible: eating three-o’clock, after-dance suppers in impossible cafés, talking of every side of life with an air half of earnestness, half of mockery, yet with a furtive excitement that Amory considered stood for a real moral letdown. But he never realized how widespread it was until he saw the cities between New York and Chicago as one vast juvenile intrigue. Afternoon at the Plaza, with winter twilight hovering outside and faint drums downstairs.	a widespread pattern of secret, youthful scheming

Afternoon at the Plaza, with winter twilight hovering outside and faint drums downstairs.	But he never realized how widespread it was until he saw the cities between New York and Chicago as one vast juvenile intrigue. Afternoon at the Plaza, with winter twilight hovering outside and faint drums downstairs. they strut and fret in the lobby, taking another cocktail, scrupulously attired and waiting.	It's afternoon at the Plaza Hotel, winter dusk is settling outside, and you can faintly hear drums from downstairs.

winter twilight	But he never realized how widespread it was until he saw the cities between New York and Chicago as one vast juvenile intrigue. Afternoon at the Plaza, with winter twilight hovering outside and faint drums downstairs. they strut and fret in the lobby, taking another cocktail, scrupulously attired and waiting.	winter dusk

outside and faint drums	But he never realized how widespread it was until he saw the cities between New York and Chicago as one vast juvenile intrigue. Afternoon at the Plaza, with winter twilight hovering outside and faint drums downstairs. they strut and fret in the lobby, taking another cocktail, scrupulously attired and waiting.	outside and quiet drums

strut and fret in the lobby, taking another cocktail, scrupulously attired and waiting.	Afternoon at the Plaza, with winter twilight hovering outside and faint drums downstairs. they strut and fret in the lobby, taking another cocktail, scrupulously attired and waiting. Then the swinging doors revolve and three bundles of fur mince in.	They pace anxiously in the lobby, having another drink, meticulously dressed, and waiting.

bundles of fur mince in.	they strut and fret in the lobby, taking another cocktail, scrupulously attired and waiting. Then the swinging doors revolve and three bundles of fur mince in. The theatre comes afterward; then a table at the Midnight Frolic—of course, mother will be along there, but she will serve only to make things more secretive and brilliant as she sits in solitary state at the deserted table and thinks such entertainments as this are not half so bad as they are painted, only rather wearying.	People wearing fur coats walk in daintily.

fur mince	they strut and fret in the lobby, taking another cocktail, scrupulously attired and waiting. Then the swinging doors revolve and three bundles of fur mince in. The theatre comes afterward; then a table at the Midnight Frolic—of course, mother will be along there, but she will serve only to make things more secretive and brilliant as she sits in solitary state at the deserted table and thinks such entertainments as this are not half so bad as they are painted, only rather wearying.	furs walk in

the swinging doors	they strut and fret in the lobby, taking another cocktail, scrupulously attired and waiting. Then the swinging doors revolve and three bundles of fur mince in. The theatre comes afterward; then a table at the Midnight Frolic—of course, mother will be along there, but she will serve only to make things more secretive and brilliant as she sits in solitary state at the deserted table and thinks such entertainments as this are not half so bad as they are painted, only rather wearying.	the revolving doors

solitary state	Then the swinging doors revolve and three bundles of fur mince in. The theatre comes afterward; then a table at the Midnight Frolic—of course, mother will be along there, but she will serve only to make things more secretive and brilliant as she sits in solitary state at the deserted table and thinks such entertainments as this are not half so bad as they are painted, only rather wearying. But the P.D. is in love again.	alone and regal

the Midnight Frolic	Then the swinging doors revolve and three bundles of fur mince in. The theatre comes afterward; then a table at the Midnight Frolic—of course, mother will be along there, but she will serve only to make things more secretive and brilliant as she sits in solitary state at the deserted table and thinks such entertainments as this are not half so bad as they are painted, only rather wearying. But the P.D. is in love again.	the Midnight Frolic

the deserted table	Then the swinging doors revolve and three bundles of fur mince in. The theatre comes afterward; then a table at the Midnight Frolic—of course, mother will be along there, but she will serve only to make things more secretive and brilliant as she sits in solitary state at the deserted table and thinks such entertainments as this are not half so bad as they are painted, only rather wearying. But the P.D. is in love again.	the empty table

thinks such entertainments as this are not half so bad as they are painted, only rather wearying.	Then the swinging doors revolve and three bundles of fur mince in. The theatre comes afterward; then a table at the Midnight Frolic—of course, mother will be along there, but she will serve only to make things more secretive and brilliant as she sits in solitary state at the deserted table and thinks such entertainments as this are not half so bad as they are painted, only rather wearying. But the P.D. is in love again.	thinks these parties aren't as awful as people say, just tiring.

was so much room left in the taxi the P.D. and the boy from Williams were somehow crowded out and had to go in a separate car.	But the P.D. is in love again. it was odd, wasn’t it?—that though there was so much room left in the taxi the P.D. and the boy from Williams were somehow crowded out and had to go in a separate car. Odd!	There was plenty of space in the taxi, but somehow the P.D. and the boy from Williams were forced to take a different car.

was when she arrived just seven minutes late?	Odd! Didn’t you notice how flushed the P.D. was when she arrived just seven minutes late? But the P.D. “gets away with it.”	when she was only seven minutes late?

the “baby vamp	But the P.D. “gets away with it.” The “belle” had become the “flirt,” the “flirt” had become the “baby vamp.” The “belle” had five or six callers every afternoon.	the "seductive young woman"

the “flirt	But the P.D. “gets away with it.” The “belle” had become the “flirt,” the “flirt” had become the “baby vamp.” The “belle” had five or six callers every afternoon.	the "flirt"

five or six callers	The “belle” had become the “flirt,” the “flirt” had become the “baby vamp.” The “belle” had five or six callers every afternoon. If the P.D., by some strange accident, has two, it is made pretty uncomfortable for the one who hasn’t a date with her.	five or six people visiting

made pretty uncomfortable for the one who hasn’t a date with her.	The “belle” had five or six callers every afternoon. If the P.D., by some strange accident, has two, it is made pretty uncomfortable for the one who hasn’t a date with her. The “belle” was surrounded by a dozen men in the intermissions between dances.	made the person without a date feel awkward.

men in the intermissions between dances.	If the P.D., by some strange accident, has two, it is made pretty uncomfortable for the one who hasn’t a date with her. The “belle” was surrounded by a dozen men in the intermissions between dances. Try to find the P.D. between dances, just try to find her.	men during the breaks between dances.

P.D. between dances, just try to find her.	The “belle” was surrounded by a dozen men in the intermissions between dances. Try to find the P.D. between dances, just try to find her. The same girl.	Good luck finding her in between dances.

questioning of moral codes.	The same girl. deep in an atmosphere of jungle music and the questioning of moral codes. Amory found it rather fascinating to feel that any popular girl he met before eight he might quite possibly kiss before twelve.	challenging what's considered right and wrong.

girl he met before eight he might quite possibly kiss before twelve.	deep in an atmosphere of jungle music and the questioning of moral codes. Amory found it rather fascinating to feel that any popular girl he met before eight he might quite possibly kiss before twelve. “Why on earth are we here?”	He might kiss any girl he met before he was eight years old before he turned twelve.

someone’s limousine	“Why on earth are we here?” he asked the girl with the green combs one night as they sat in someone’s limousine, outside the Country Club in Louisville. “I don’t know.	someone's limo

the green combs	“Why on earth are we here?” he asked the girl with the green combs one night as they sat in someone’s limousine, outside the Country Club in Louisville. “I don’t know.	the girl with the green combs

asked the girl with the green combs one night as they sat in someone’s limousine, outside the Country Club in Louisville.	“Why on earth are we here?” he asked the girl with the green combs one night as they sat in someone’s limousine, outside the Country Club in Louisville. “I don’t know.	the girl with the green combs one night when they were sitting in a limousine outside the Country Club in Louisville.

come out here with you because I thought you were the best-looking girl in sight.	“Let’s be frank—we’ll never see each other again. I wanted to come out here with you because I thought you were the best-looking girl in sight. You really don’t care whether you ever see me again, do you?”	I came here with you because I thought you were the prettiest girl I saw.

any of the things you said?	What have I done to deserve it?” “And you didn’t feel tired dancing or want a cigarette or any of the things you said? You just wanted to be—” “Oh, let’s go in,” she interrupted, “if you want to analyze.	anything you mentioned?

sleeveless jerseys	Let’s not talk about it.” When the hand-knit, sleeveless jerseys were stylish, Amory, in a burst of inspiration, named them “petting shirts.” The name travelled from coast to coast on the lips of parlor-snakes and P.D.s.	sleeveless jerseys

were stylish, Amory, in a burst of inspiration, named them “petting shirts.”	Let’s not talk about it.” When the hand-knit, sleeveless jerseys were stylish, Amory, in a burst of inspiration, named them “petting shirts.” The name travelled from coast to coast on the lips of parlor-snakes and P.D.s.	were in style, Amory, in a moment of creativity, called them "petting shirts."

travelled from coast to coast on the lips of parlor-snakes and P.D.s.	When the hand-knit, sleeveless jerseys were stylish, Amory, in a burst of inspiration, named them “petting shirts.” The name travelled from coast to coast on the lips of parlor-snakes and P.D.s.	was repeated everywhere by gossips and popular guys.

the penetrating green eyes	Amory was now eighteen years old, just under six feet tall and exceptionally, but not conventionally, handsome. He had rather a young face, the ingenuousness of which was marred by the penetrating green eyes, fringed with long dark eyelashes. He lacked somehow that intense animal magnetism that so often accompanies beauty in men or women; his personality seemed rather a mental thing, and it was not in his power to turn it on and off like a water-faucet.	eyes that seemed to look right through you

long dark eyelashes	Amory was now eighteen years old, just under six feet tall and exceptionally, but not conventionally, handsome. He had rather a young face, the ingenuousness of which was marred by the penetrating green eyes, fringed with long dark eyelashes. He lacked somehow that intense animal magnetism that so often accompanies beauty in men or women; his personality seemed rather a mental thing, and it was not in his power to turn it on and off like a water-faucet.	long, dark eyelashes

fringed with long dark eyelashes.	Amory was now eighteen years old, just under six feet tall and exceptionally, but not conventionally, handsome. He had rather a young face, the ingenuousness of which was marred by the penetrating green eyes, fringed with long dark eyelashes. He lacked somehow that intense animal magnetism that so often accompanies beauty in men or women; his personality seemed rather a mental thing, and it was not in his power to turn it on and off like a water-faucet.	with long, dark eyelashes.

that intense animal magnetism	He had rather a young face, the ingenuousness of which was marred by the penetrating green eyes, fringed with long dark eyelashes. He lacked somehow that intense animal magnetism that so often accompanies beauty in men or women; his personality seemed rather a mental thing, and it was not in his power to turn it on and off like a water-faucet. But people never forgot his face.	a powerful, natural charm

a water-faucet	He had rather a young face, the ingenuousness of which was marred by the penetrating green eyes, fringed with long dark eyelashes. He lacked somehow that intense animal magnetism that so often accompanies beauty in men or women; his personality seemed rather a mental thing, and it was not in his power to turn it on and off like a water-faucet. But people never forgot his face.	a tap

off like a water-faucet.	He had rather a young face, the ingenuousness of which was marred by the penetrating green eyes, fringed with long dark eyelashes. He lacked somehow that intense animal magnetism that so often accompanies beauty in men or women; his personality seemed rather a mental thing, and it was not in his power to turn it on and off like a water-faucet. But people never forgot his face.	like turning on and off a tap.

paused at the top of the staircase.	She paused at the top of the staircase. The sensations attributed to divers on springboards, leading ladies on opening nights, and lumpy, husky young men on the day of the Big Game, crowded through her.	stopped at the top of the stairs.

ladies on opening nights, and lumpy, husky young men on the day of the Big Game, crowded through her.	She paused at the top of the staircase. The sensations attributed to divers on springboards, leading ladies on opening nights, and lumpy, husky young men on the day of the Big Game, crowded through her. She should have descended to a burst of drums or a discordant blend of themes from Thais and Carmen.	like actresses on opening night, and nervous athletes on game day, overwhelmed her.

lumpy, husky young men	She paused at the top of the staircase. The sensations attributed to divers on springboards, leading ladies on opening nights, and lumpy, husky young men on the day of the Big Game, crowded through her. She should have descended to a burst of drums or a discordant blend of themes from Thais and Carmen.	awkward, strong young men

a discordant blend	The sensations attributed to divers on springboards, leading ladies on opening nights, and lumpy, husky young men on the day of the Big Game, crowded through her. She should have descended to a burst of drums or a discordant blend of themes from Thais and Carmen. She had never been so curious about her appearance, she had never been so satisfied with it.	an unpleasant mixture

descended to a burst of drums or a discordant blend of themes from Thais and Carmen.	The sensations attributed to divers on springboards, leading ladies on opening nights, and lumpy, husky young men on the day of the Big Game, crowded through her. She should have descended to a burst of drums or a discordant blend of themes from Thais and Carmen. She had never been so curious about her appearance, she had never been so satisfied with it.	started with a dramatic drumroll or a chaotic mix of music.

been sixteen years old for six months.	She had never been so curious about her appearance, she had never been so satisfied with it. She had been sixteen years old for six months. “Isabelle!” called her cousin Sally from the doorway of the dressing-room.	sixteen and a half.

cousin Sally from the doorway of the dressing-room.	She had been sixteen years old for six months. “Isabelle!” called her cousin Sally from the doorway of the dressing-room. “I’m ready.”	cousin Sally from the doorway of the dressing room.

a slight lump	“I’m ready.” She caught a slight lump of nervousness in her throat. “I had to send back to the house for another pair of slippers.	a little nervous feeling

caught a slight lump of nervousness in her throat.	“I’m ready.” She caught a slight lump of nervousness in her throat. “I had to send back to the house for another pair of slippers.	felt a little nervous.

send back to the house for another pair of slippers.	She caught a slight lump of nervousness in her throat. “I had to send back to the house for another pair of slippers. It’ll be just a minute.”	send someone home to get another pair of slippers.

the broad stairs	It’ll be just a minute.” Isabelle started toward the dressing-room for a last peek in the mirror, but something decided her to stand there and gaze down the broad stairs of the Minnehaha Club. They curved tantalizingly, and she could catch just a glimpse of two pairs of masculine feet in the hall below.	wide stairs

started toward the dressing-room for a last peek in the mirror, but something decided her to stand there and gaze down the broad stairs of the Minnehaha Club.	It’ll be just a minute.” Isabelle started toward the dressing-room for a last peek in the mirror, but something decided her to stand there and gaze down the broad stairs of the Minnehaha Club. They curved tantalizingly, and she could catch just a glimpse of two pairs of masculine feet in the hall below.	headed to the dressing room for a final look in the mirror, but she decided to stop and stare down the wide stairs of the Minnehaha Club.

the Minnehaha Club	It’ll be just a minute.” Isabelle started toward the dressing-room for a last peek in the mirror, but something decided her to stand there and gaze down the broad stairs of the Minnehaha Club. They curved tantalizingly, and she could catch just a glimpse of two pairs of masculine feet in the hall below.	the Minnehaha Club

a last peek	It’ll be just a minute.” Isabelle started toward the dressing-room for a last peek in the mirror, but something decided her to stand there and gaze down the broad stairs of the Minnehaha Club. They curved tantalizingly, and she could catch just a glimpse of two pairs of masculine feet in the hall below.	one last look

masculine feet	Isabelle started toward the dressing-room for a last peek in the mirror, but something decided her to stand there and gaze down the broad stairs of the Minnehaha Club. They curved tantalizingly, and she could catch just a glimpse of two pairs of masculine feet in the hall below. Pump-shod in uniform black, they gave no hint of identity, but she wondered eagerly if one pair were attached to Amory Blaine.	men's feet

glimpse of two pairs of masculine feet in the hall below.	Isabelle started toward the dressing-room for a last peek in the mirror, but something decided her to stand there and gaze down the broad stairs of the Minnehaha Club. They curved tantalizingly, and she could catch just a glimpse of two pairs of masculine feet in the hall below. Pump-shod in uniform black, they gave no hint of identity, but she wondered eagerly if one pair were attached to Amory Blaine.	a quick look at two pairs of men's shoes in the hall downstairs.

just a glimpse	Isabelle started toward the dressing-room for a last peek in the mirror, but something decided her to stand there and gaze down the broad stairs of the Minnehaha Club. They curved tantalizingly, and she could catch just a glimpse of two pairs of masculine feet in the hall below. Pump-shod in uniform black, they gave no hint of identity, but she wondered eagerly if one pair were attached to Amory Blaine.	only a quick look

hint of identity, but she wondered eagerly if one pair were attached to Amory Blaine.	They curved tantalizingly, and she could catch just a glimpse of two pairs of masculine feet in the hall below. Pump-shod in uniform black, they gave no hint of identity, but she wondered eagerly if one pair were attached to Amory Blaine. This young man, not as yet encountered, had nevertheless taken up a considerable part of her day—the first day of her arrival.	she wondered if they belonged to Amory Blaine.

rain of question, comment, revelation, and exaggeration: “You remember Amory Blaine, of course.	This young man, not as yet encountered, had nevertheless taken up a considerable part of her day—the first day of her arrival. Coming up in the machine from the station, Sally had volunteered, amid a rain of question, comment, revelation, and exaggeration: “You remember Amory Blaine, of course. Well, he’s simply mad to see you again.	lots of questions, comments, news, and tall tales: "You remember Amory Blaine, right?

stayed over a day from college, and he’s coming tonight.	Well, he’s simply mad to see you again. He’s stayed over a day from college, and he’s coming tonight. He’s heard so much about you—says he remembers your eyes.”	He skipped a day of college and he's coming tonight.

capable of staging her own romances, with or without advance advertising.	This had pleased Isabelle. It put them on equal terms, although she was quite capable of staging her own romances, with or without advance advertising. But following her happy tremble of anticipation, came a sinking sensation that made her ask: “How do you mean he’s heard about me?	able to create her own love stories, whether or not she publicized them beforehand.

a sinking sensation	It put them on equal terms, although she was quite capable of staging her own romances, with or without advance advertising. But following her happy tremble of anticipation, came a sinking sensation that made her ask: “How do you mean he’s heard about me? What sort of things?”	a worried feeling

came a sinking sensation that made her ask: “How do you mean he’s heard about me?	It put them on equal terms, although she was quite capable of staging her own romances, with or without advance advertising. But following her happy tremble of anticipation, came a sinking sensation that made her ask: “How do you mean he’s heard about me? What sort of things?”	a sinking feeling made her ask, "What do you mean he's heard about me?

her happy tremble	It put them on equal terms, although she was quite capable of staging her own romances, with or without advance advertising. But following her happy tremble of anticipation, came a sinking sensation that made her ask: “How do you mean he’s heard about me? What sort of things?”	her excited anticipation

her more exotic cousin	Sally smiled. She felt rather in the capacity of a showman with her more exotic cousin. “He knows you’re—you’re considered beautiful and all that”—she paused—“and	her more unusual cousin

felt rather in the capacity of a showman with her more exotic cousin.	Sally smiled. She felt rather in the capacity of a showman with her more exotic cousin. “He knows you’re—you’re considered beautiful and all that”—she paused—“and	felt like she was showing off her more unusual cousin.

this Isabelle’s little fist	I guess he knows you’ve been kissed.” At this Isabelle’s little fist had clinched suddenly under the fur robe. She was accustomed to be thus followed by her desperate past, and it never failed to rouse in her the same feeling of resentment; yet—in a strange town it was an advantageous reputation.	Isabelle's fist

clinched suddenly under the fur robe.	I guess he knows you’ve been kissed.” At this Isabelle’s little fist had clinched suddenly under the fur robe. She was accustomed to be thus followed by her desperate past, and it never failed to rouse in her the same feeling of resentment; yet—in a strange town it was an advantageous reputation.	closed suddenly under the fur robe.

the fur robe	I guess he knows you’ve been kissed.” At this Isabelle’s little fist had clinched suddenly under the fur robe. She was accustomed to be thus followed by her desperate past, and it never failed to rouse in her the same feeling of resentment; yet—in a strange town it was an advantageous reputation.	fur robe

an advantageous reputation	At this Isabelle’s little fist had clinched suddenly under the fur robe. She was accustomed to be thus followed by her desperate past, and it never failed to rouse in her the same feeling of resentment; yet—in a strange town it was an advantageous reputation. She was a “Speed,” was she?	a helpful reputation

was an advantageous reputation.	At this Isabelle’s little fist had clinched suddenly under the fur robe. She was accustomed to be thus followed by her desperate past, and it never failed to rouse in her the same feeling of resentment; yet—in a strange town it was an advantageous reputation. She was a “Speed,” was she?	It was a useful reputation to have.

watched the snow glide by in the frosty morning.	Well—let them find out. Out of the window Isabelle watched the snow glide by in the frosty morning. It was ever so much colder here than in Baltimore; she had not remembered; the glass of the side door was iced, the windows were shirred with snow in the corners.	watched the snow slide past on the freezing morning.

the frosty morning	Well—let them find out. Out of the window Isabelle watched the snow glide by in the frosty morning. It was ever so much colder here than in Baltimore; she had not remembered; the glass of the side door was iced, the windows were shirred with snow in the corners.	the freezing morning

glass of the side door was iced, the windows were shirred with snow in the corners.	Out of the window Isabelle watched the snow glide by in the frosty morning. It was ever so much colder here than in Baltimore; she had not remembered; the glass of the side door was iced, the windows were shirred with snow in the corners. Her mind played still with one subject.	The side door was covered in ice, and snow had gathered in the corners of the windows.

dress like that boy there, who walked calmly down a bustling business street, in moccasins and winter-carnival costume?	Her mind played still with one subject. Did he dress like that boy there, who walked calmly down a bustling business street, in moccasins and winter-carnival costume? How very Western!	dress like that boy walking down the busy street in moccasins and a winter carnival outfit?

a bustling business street	Her mind played still with one subject. Did he dress like that boy there, who walked calmly down a bustling business street, in moccasins and winter-carnival costume? How very Western!	a busy business street

went to Princeton, was a sophomore or something.	How very Western! Of course he wasn’t that way: he went to Princeton, was a sophomore or something. Really she had no distinct idea of him.	He went to Princeton, maybe a sophomore.

eyes (which he had probably grown up to by now).	Really she had no distinct idea of him. An ancient snapshot she had preserved in an old kodak book had impressed her by the big eyes (which he had probably grown up to by now). However, in the last month, when her winter visit to Sally had been decided on, he had assumed the proportions of a worthy adversary.	eyes (that he'd probably grown into by now).

assumed the proportions of a worthy adversary.	An ancient snapshot she had preserved in an old kodak book had impressed her by the big eyes (which he had probably grown up to by now). However, in the last month, when her winter visit to Sally had been decided on, he had assumed the proportions of a worthy adversary. Children, most astute of matchmakers, plot their campaigns quickly, and Sally had played a clever correspondence sonata to Isabelle’s excitable temperament.	become someone to compete with.

a worthy adversary	An ancient snapshot she had preserved in an old kodak book had impressed her by the big eyes (which he had probably grown up to by now). However, in the last month, when her winter visit to Sally had been decided on, he had assumed the proportions of a worthy adversary. Children, most astute of matchmakers, plot their campaigns quickly, and Sally had played a clever correspondence sonata to Isabelle’s excitable temperament.	a suitable challenge

a clever correspondence sonata	However, in the last month, when her winter visit to Sally had been decided on, he had assumed the proportions of a worthy adversary. Children, most astute of matchmakers, plot their campaigns quickly, and Sally had played a clever correspondence sonata to Isabelle’s excitable temperament. Isabelle had been for some time capable of very strong, if very transient emotions.	a clever exchange of letters

sonata to Isabelle’s excitable temperament.	However, in the last month, when her winter visit to Sally had been decided on, he had assumed the proportions of a worthy adversary. Children, most astute of matchmakers, plot their campaigns quickly, and Sally had played a clever correspondence sonata to Isabelle’s excitable temperament. Isabelle had been for some time capable of very strong, if very transient emotions.	like music that excited Isabelle.

Isabelle’s excitable temperament	However, in the last month, when her winter visit to Sally had been decided on, he had assumed the proportions of a worthy adversary. Children, most astute of matchmakers, plot their campaigns quickly, and Sally had played a clever correspondence sonata to Isabelle’s excitable temperament. Isabelle had been for some time capable of very strong, if very transient emotions.	Isabelle got excited easily.

been for some time capable of very strong, if very transient emotions.	Children, most astute of matchmakers, plot their campaigns quickly, and Sally had played a clever correspondence sonata to Isabelle’s excitable temperament. Isabelle had been for some time capable of very strong, if very transient emotions. They drew up at a spreading, white-stone building, set back from the snowy street.	experiencing intense, but short-lived, feelings for a while.

if very transient emotions	Children, most astute of matchmakers, plot their campaigns quickly, and Sally had played a clever correspondence sonata to Isabelle’s excitable temperament. Isabelle had been for some time capable of very strong, if very transient emotions. They drew up at a spreading, white-stone building, set back from the snowy street.	even though her feelings didn't last long

drew up at a spreading, white-stone building, set back from the snowy street.	Isabelle had been for some time capable of very strong, if very transient emotions. They drew up at a spreading, white-stone building, set back from the snowy street. Mrs. Weatherby greeted her warmly and her various younger cousins were produced from the corners where they skulked politely.	stopped at a wide, white stone building, away from the snowy street.

the snowy street	Isabelle had been for some time capable of very strong, if very transient emotions. They drew up at a spreading, white-stone building, set back from the snowy street. Mrs. Weatherby greeted her warmly and her various younger cousins were produced from the corners where they skulked politely.	the street covered in snow

her various younger cousins	They drew up at a spreading, white-stone building, set back from the snowy street. Mrs. Weatherby greeted her warmly and her various younger cousins were produced from the corners where they skulked politely. Isabelle met them tactfully.	her younger cousins

produced from the corners where they skulked politely.	They drew up at a spreading, white-stone building, set back from the snowy street. Mrs. Weatherby greeted her warmly and her various younger cousins were produced from the corners where they skulked politely. Isabelle met them tactfully.	brought out from the corners where they were hiding politely.

allied all with whom she came in contact—except older girls and some women.	Isabelle met them tactfully. At her best she allied all with whom she came in contact—except older girls and some women. All the impressions she made were conscious.	got along well with everyone she met—except older girls and some women.

much by her direct personality as by her reputation.	All the impressions she made were conscious. The half-dozen girls she renewed acquaintance with that morning were all rather impressed and as much by her direct personality as by her reputation. Amory Blaine was an open subject.	by her straightforward personality as by what people said about her.

had an affair with him at some time or other, but no one volunteered any really useful information.	Amory Blaine was an open subject. Evidently a bit light of love, neither popular nor unpopular—every girl there seemed to have had an affair with him at some time or other, but no one volunteered any really useful information. He was going to fall for her.	had some kind of involvement with him, but nobody offered any real details.

set eyes on Isabelle.	He was going to fall for her. Sally had published that information to her young set and they were retailing it back to Sally as fast as they set eyes on Isabelle. Isabelle resolved secretly that she would, if necessary, force herself to like him—she owed it to Sally.	saw Isabelle.

necessary, force herself to like him—she owed it to Sally.	Sally had published that information to her young set and they were retailing it back to Sally as fast as they set eyes on Isabelle. Isabelle resolved secretly that she would, if necessary, force herself to like him—she owed it to Sally. Suppose she were terribly disappointed.	have to make herself like him because she felt obligated to Sally.

painted him in such glowing colors—he was good-looking, “sort of distinguished, when he wants to be,” had a line, and was properly inconstant.	Suppose she were terribly disappointed. Sally had painted him in such glowing colors—he was good-looking, “sort of distinguished, when he wants to be,” had a line, and was properly inconstant. In fact, he summed up all the romance that her age and environment led her to desire.	described him so positively—he was handsome, "kind of sophisticated when he tries," knew how to charm people, and wasn't the type to stay interested for long.

such glowing colors	Suppose she were terribly disappointed. Sally had painted him in such glowing colors—he was good-looking, “sort of distinguished, when he wants to be,” had a line, and was properly inconstant. In fact, he summed up all the romance that her age and environment led her to desire.	in such a positive way

foxtrotted tentatively around the soft rug below.	In fact, he summed up all the romance that her age and environment led her to desire. She wondered if those were his dancing-shoes that foxtrotted tentatively around the soft rug below. All impressions and, in fact, all ideas were extremely kaleidoscopic to Isabelle.	danced carefully on the rug.

kaleidoscopic to Isabelle.	She wondered if those were his dancing-shoes that foxtrotted tentatively around the soft rug below. All impressions and, in fact, all ideas were extremely kaleidoscopic to Isabelle. She had that curious mixture of the social and the artistic temperaments found often in two classes, society women and actresses.	seemed jumbled and confusing to Isabelle.

mixture of the social and the artistic temperaments found often in two classes, society women and actresses.	All impressions and, in fact, all ideas were extremely kaleidoscopic to Isabelle. She had that curious mixture of the social and the artistic temperaments found often in two classes, society women and actresses. Her education or, rather, her sophistication, had been absorbed from the boys who had dangled on her favor; her tact was instinctive, and her capacity for love-affairs was limited only by the number of the susceptible within telephone distance.	a blend of social skills and artistic sensibilities common in socialites and actresses.

the artistic temperaments	All impressions and, in fact, all ideas were extremely kaleidoscopic to Isabelle. She had that curious mixture of the social and the artistic temperaments found often in two classes, society women and actresses. Her education or, rather, her sophistication, had been absorbed from the boys who had dangled on her favor; her tact was instinctive, and her capacity for love-affairs was limited only by the number of the susceptible within telephone distance.	artistic personalities

susceptible within telephone distance.	She had that curious mixture of the social and the artistic temperaments found often in two classes, society women and actresses. Her education or, rather, her sophistication, had been absorbed from the boys who had dangled on her favor; her tact was instinctive, and her capacity for love-affairs was limited only by the number of the susceptible within telephone distance. Flirt smiled from her large black-brown eyes and shone through her intense physical magnetism.	men who could be reached by phone.

her intense physical magnetism	Her education or, rather, her sophistication, had been absorbed from the boys who had dangled on her favor; her tact was instinctive, and her capacity for love-affairs was limited only by the number of the susceptible within telephone distance. Flirt smiled from her large black-brown eyes and shone through her intense physical magnetism. So she waited at the head of the stairs that evening while slippers were fetched.	her strong attraction

shone through her intense physical magnetism.	Her education or, rather, her sophistication, had been absorbed from the boys who had dangled on her favor; her tact was instinctive, and her capacity for love-affairs was limited only by the number of the susceptible within telephone distance. Flirt smiled from her large black-brown eyes and shone through her intense physical magnetism. So she waited at the head of the stairs that evening while slippers were fetched.	was evident in her powerful physical appeal.

head of the stairs that evening while slippers were fetched.	Flirt smiled from her large black-brown eyes and shone through her intense physical magnetism. So she waited at the head of the stairs that evening while slippers were fetched. Just as she was growing impatient, Sally came out of the dressing-room, beaming with her accustomed good nature and high spirits, and together they descended to the floor below, while the shifting searchlight of Isabelle’s mind flashed on two ideas: she was glad she had high color tonight, and she wondered if he danced well.	at the top of the stairs that evening while someone got her slippers.

came out of the dressing-room, beaming with her accustomed good nature and high spirits, and together they descended to the floor below, while the shifting searchlight of Isabelle’s mind flashed on two ideas: she was glad she had high color tonight, and she wondered if he danced well.	So she waited at the head of the stairs that evening while slippers were fetched. Just as she was growing impatient, Sally came out of the dressing-room, beaming with her accustomed good nature and high spirits, and together they descended to the floor below, while the shifting searchlight of Isabelle’s mind flashed on two ideas: she was glad she had high color tonight, and she wondered if he danced well. Downstairs, in the club’s great room, she was surrounded for a moment by the girls she had met in the afternoon, then she heard Sally’s voice repeating a cycle of names, and found herself bowing to a sextet of black and white, terribly stiff, vaguely familiar figures.	came out of the dressing room, smiling with her usual cheerfulness and energy, and together they went downstairs. Isabelle quickly thought: she was happy she looked flushed tonight, and she wondered if he was a good dancer.

her accustomed good nature	So she waited at the head of the stairs that evening while slippers were fetched. Just as she was growing impatient, Sally came out of the dressing-room, beaming with her accustomed good nature and high spirits, and together they descended to the floor below, while the shifting searchlight of Isabelle’s mind flashed on two ideas: she was glad she had high color tonight, and she wondered if he danced well. Downstairs, in the club’s great room, she was surrounded for a moment by the girls she had met in the afternoon, then she heard Sally’s voice repeating a cycle of names, and found herself bowing to a sextet of black and white, terribly stiff, vaguely familiar figures.	her usual good nature

the shifting searchlight	So she waited at the head of the stairs that evening while slippers were fetched. Just as she was growing impatient, Sally came out of the dressing-room, beaming with her accustomed good nature and high spirits, and together they descended to the floor below, while the shifting searchlight of Isabelle’s mind flashed on two ideas: she was glad she had high color tonight, and she wondered if he danced well. Downstairs, in the club’s great room, she was surrounded for a moment by the girls she had met in the afternoon, then she heard Sally’s voice repeating a cycle of names, and found herself bowing to a sextet of black and white, terribly stiff, vaguely familiar figures.	her changing thoughts

Isabelle’s mind	So she waited at the head of the stairs that evening while slippers were fetched. Just as she was growing impatient, Sally came out of the dressing-room, beaming with her accustomed good nature and high spirits, and together they descended to the floor below, while the shifting searchlight of Isabelle’s mind flashed on two ideas: she was glad she had high color tonight, and she wondered if he danced well. Downstairs, in the club’s great room, she was surrounded for a moment by the girls she had met in the afternoon, then she heard Sally’s voice repeating a cycle of names, and found herself bowing to a sextet of black and white, terribly stiff, vaguely familiar figures.	Isabelle's thoughts

met in the afternoon, then she heard Sally’s voice repeating a cycle of names, and found herself bowing to a sextet of black and white, terribly stiff, vaguely familiar figures.	Just as she was growing impatient, Sally came out of the dressing-room, beaming with her accustomed good nature and high spirits, and together they descended to the floor below, while the shifting searchlight of Isabelle’s mind flashed on two ideas: she was glad she had high color tonight, and she wondered if he danced well. Downstairs, in the club’s great room, she was surrounded for a moment by the girls she had met in the afternoon, then she heard Sally’s voice repeating a cycle of names, and found herself bowing to a sextet of black and white, terribly stiff, vaguely familiar figures. The name Blaine figured somewhere,	met that afternoon. Then she heard Sally introducing people and found herself bowing to six men in black and white suits who were very formal and somewhat familiar.

Sally’s voice	Just as she was growing impatient, Sally came out of the dressing-room, beaming with her accustomed good nature and high spirits, and together they descended to the floor below, while the shifting searchlight of Isabelle’s mind flashed on two ideas: she was glad she had high color tonight, and she wondered if he danced well. Downstairs, in the club’s great room, she was surrounded for a moment by the girls she had met in the afternoon, then she heard Sally’s voice repeating a cycle of names, and found herself bowing to a sextet of black and white, terribly stiff, vaguely familiar figures. The name Blaine figured somewhere,	Sally's voice

the club’s great room	Just as she was growing impatient, Sally came out of the dressing-room, beaming with her accustomed good nature and high spirits, and together they descended to the floor below, while the shifting searchlight of Isabelle’s mind flashed on two ideas: she was glad she had high color tonight, and she wondered if he danced well. Downstairs, in the club’s great room, she was surrounded for a moment by the girls she had met in the afternoon, then she heard Sally’s voice repeating a cycle of names, and found herself bowing to a sextet of black and white, terribly stiff, vaguely familiar figures. The name Blaine figured somewhere,	the club's large room

black and white, terribly stiff, vaguely familiar figures	Just as she was growing impatient, Sally came out of the dressing-room, beaming with her accustomed good nature and high spirits, and together they descended to the floor below, while the shifting searchlight of Isabelle’s mind flashed on two ideas: she was glad she had high color tonight, and she wondered if he danced well. Downstairs, in the club’s great room, she was surrounded for a moment by the girls she had met in the afternoon, then she heard Sally’s voice repeating a cycle of names, and found herself bowing to a sextet of black and white, terribly stiff, vaguely familiar figures. The name Blaine figured somewhere,	black and white, very formal, and somewhat recognizable people

name Blaine figured somewhere,	Downstairs, in the club’s great room, she was surrounded for a moment by the girls she had met in the afternoon, then she heard Sally’s voice repeating a cycle of names, and found herself bowing to a sextet of black and white, terribly stiff, vaguely familiar figures. The name Blaine figured somewhere, but at first she could not place him.	She recognized the name Blaine.

talking to the person he least desired to.	but at first she could not place him. A very confused, very juvenile moment of awkward backings and bumpings followed, and everyone found himself talking to the person he least desired to. Isabelle maneuvered herself and Froggy Parker, freshman at Harvard, with whom she had once played hopscotch, to a seat on the stairs.	talking to the person they wanted to talk to the least.

awkward backings	but at first she could not place him. A very confused, very juvenile moment of awkward backings and bumpings followed, and everyone found himself talking to the person he least desired to. Isabelle maneuvered herself and Froggy Parker, freshman at Harvard, with whom she had once played hopscotch, to a seat on the stairs.	awkward movements backward

A very confused, very juvenile moment	but at first she could not place him. A very confused, very juvenile moment of awkward backings and bumpings followed, and everyone found himself talking to the person he least desired to. Isabelle maneuvered herself and Froggy Parker, freshman at Harvard, with whom she had once played hopscotch, to a seat on the stairs.	A very confusing, childish moment

maneuvered herself and Froggy Parker, freshman at Harvard, with whom she had once played hopscotch, to a seat on the stairs.	A very confused, very juvenile moment of awkward backings and bumpings followed, and everyone found himself talking to the person he least desired to. Isabelle maneuvered herself and Froggy Parker, freshman at Harvard, with whom she had once played hopscotch, to a seat on the stairs. A humorous reference to the past was all she needed.	got herself and Froggy Parker, a Harvard freshman she used to play hopscotch with, to sit on the stairs.

A humorous reference	Isabelle maneuvered herself and Froggy Parker, freshman at Harvard, with whom she had once played hopscotch, to a seat on the stairs. A humorous reference to the past was all she needed. The things Isabelle could do socially with one idea were remarkable.	A funny comment.

things Isabelle could do socially with one idea were remarkable.	A humorous reference to the past was all she needed. The things Isabelle could do socially with one idea were remarkable. First, she repeated it rapturously in an enthusiastic contralto with a soupçon of Southern accent; then she held it off at a distance and smiled at it—her wonderful smile; then she delivered it in variations and played a sort of mental catch with it, all this in the nominal form of dialogue.	Isabelle's social skills with a single idea were amazing.

the nominal form	The things Isabelle could do socially with one idea were remarkable. First, she repeated it rapturously in an enthusiastic contralto with a soupçon of Southern accent; then she held it off at a distance and smiled at it—her wonderful smile; then she delivered it in variations and played a sort of mental catch with it, all this in the nominal form of dialogue. Froggy was fascinated and quite unconscious that this was being done, not for him, but for the green eyes that glistened under the shining carefully watered hair, a little to her left, for Isabelle had discovered Amory.	in the guise of a conversation

soupçon of Southern accent; then she held it off at a distance and smiled at it—her wonderful smile; then she delivered it in variations and played a sort of mental catch with it, all this in the nominal form of dialogue.	The things Isabelle could do socially with one idea were remarkable. First, she repeated it rapturously in an enthusiastic contralto with a soupçon of Southern accent; then she held it off at a distance and smiled at it—her wonderful smile; then she delivered it in variations and played a sort of mental catch with it, all this in the nominal form of dialogue. Froggy was fascinated and quite unconscious that this was being done, not for him, but for the green eyes that glistened under the shining carefully watered hair, a little to her left, for Isabelle had discovered Amory.	a hint of a Southern accent; then she considered it thoughtfully and smiled—her wonderful smile; then she presented it in different ways and played with the idea mentally, all while pretending it was a conversation.

an enthusiastic contralto	The things Isabelle could do socially with one idea were remarkable. First, she repeated it rapturously in an enthusiastic contralto with a soupçon of Southern accent; then she held it off at a distance and smiled at it—her wonderful smile; then she delivered it in variations and played a sort of mental catch with it, all this in the nominal form of dialogue. Froggy was fascinated and quite unconscious that this was being done, not for him, but for the green eyes that glistened under the shining carefully watered hair, a little to her left, for Isabelle had discovered Amory.	an enthusiastic low singing voice

the shining carefully watered hair	First, she repeated it rapturously in an enthusiastic contralto with a soupçon of Southern accent; then she held it off at a distance and smiled at it—her wonderful smile; then she delivered it in variations and played a sort of mental catch with it, all this in the nominal form of dialogue. Froggy was fascinated and quite unconscious that this was being done, not for him, but for the green eyes that glistened under the shining carefully watered hair, a little to her left, for Isabelle had discovered Amory. As an actress even in the fullest flush of her own conscious magnetism gets a deep impression of most of the people in the front row, so Isabelle sized up her antagonist.	the shiny, carefully styled hair

discovered Amory.	First, she repeated it rapturously in an enthusiastic contralto with a soupçon of Southern accent; then she held it off at a distance and smiled at it—her wonderful smile; then she delivered it in variations and played a sort of mental catch with it, all this in the nominal form of dialogue. Froggy was fascinated and quite unconscious that this was being done, not for him, but for the green eyes that glistened under the shining carefully watered hair, a little to her left, for Isabelle had discovered Amory. As an actress even in the fullest flush of her own conscious magnetism gets a deep impression of most of the people in the front row, so Isabelle sized up her antagonist.	found Amory.

her own conscious magnetism	Froggy was fascinated and quite unconscious that this was being done, not for him, but for the green eyes that glistened under the shining carefully watered hair, a little to her left, for Isabelle had discovered Amory. As an actress even in the fullest flush of her own conscious magnetism gets a deep impression of most of the people in the front row, so Isabelle sized up her antagonist. First, he had auburn hair, and from her feeling of disappointment she knew that she had expected him to be dark and of garter-advertisement slenderness.	her own awareness of how attractive she was

flush of her own conscious magnetism gets a deep impression of most of the people in the front row, so Isabelle sized up her antagonist.	Froggy was fascinated and quite unconscious that this was being done, not for him, but for the green eyes that glistened under the shining carefully watered hair, a little to her left, for Isabelle had discovered Amory. As an actress even in the fullest flush of her own conscious magnetism gets a deep impression of most of the people in the front row, so Isabelle sized up her antagonist. First, he had auburn hair, and from her feeling of disappointment she knew that she had expected him to be dark and of garter-advertisement slenderness.	Isabelle, with all her self-awareness and charm, noticed most of the people watching. She quickly assessed her rival, Amory.

knew that she had expected him to be dark and of garter-advertisement slenderness.	As an actress even in the fullest flush of her own conscious magnetism gets a deep impression of most of the people in the front row, so Isabelle sized up her antagonist. First, he had auburn hair, and from her feeling of disappointment she knew that she had expected him to be dark and of garter-advertisement slenderness. For the rest, a faint flush and a straight, romantic profile; the effect set off by a close-fitting dress suit and a silk ruffled shirt of the kind that women still delight to see men wear, but men were just beginning to get tired of.	she realized she'd imagined him dark-haired and impossibly slim.

garter-advertisement slenderness	As an actress even in the fullest flush of her own conscious magnetism gets a deep impression of most of the people in the front row, so Isabelle sized up her antagonist. First, he had auburn hair, and from her feeling of disappointment she knew that she had expected him to be dark and of garter-advertisement slenderness. For the rest, a faint flush and a straight, romantic profile; the effect set off by a close-fitting dress suit and a silk ruffled shirt of the kind that women still delight to see men wear, but men were just beginning to get tired of.	incredibly slender

a silk ruffled shirt	First, he had auburn hair, and from her feeling of disappointment she knew that she had expected him to be dark and of garter-advertisement slenderness. For the rest, a faint flush and a straight, romantic profile; the effect set off by a close-fitting dress suit and a silk ruffled shirt of the kind that women still delight to see men wear, but men were just beginning to get tired of. During this inspection Amory was quietly watching.	a fancy silk shirt

way over to their table.	she said suddenly, turning to him, innocent-eyed. There was a stir, and Sally led the way over to their table. Amory struggled to Isabelle’s side, and whispered: “You’re my dinner partner, you know.	way over to their table.

struggled to Isabelle’s side, and whispered: “You’re my dinner partner, you know.	There was a stir, and Sally led the way over to their table. Amory struggled to Isabelle’s side, and whispered: “You’re my dinner partner, you know. We’re all coached for each other.”	managed to get next to Isabelle and whispered: "You're supposed to be my dinner partner, you know."

Isabelle’s side	There was a stir, and Sally led the way over to their table. Amory struggled to Isabelle’s side, and whispered: “You’re my dinner partner, you know. We’re all coached for each other.”	Isabelle's side

taken from the star and given to a minor character.	Isabelle gasped—this was rather right in line. But really she felt as if a good speech had been taken from the star and given to a minor character. She mustn’t lose the leadership a bit.	stolen from the main actor and given to someone unimportant.

confusion of getting places and then curious eyes were turned on her, sitting near the head.	She mustn’t lose the leadership a bit. The dinner-table glittered with laughter at the confusion of getting places and then curious eyes were turned on her, sitting near the head. She was enjoying this immensely, and Froggy Parker was so engrossed with the added sparkle of her rising color that he forgot to pull out Sally’s chair, and fell into a dim confusion.	the scramble to find seats, then everyone looked at her as she sat close to the head of the table.

the added sparkle	The dinner-table glittered with laughter at the confusion of getting places and then curious eyes were turned on her, sitting near the head. She was enjoying this immensely, and Froggy Parker was so engrossed with the added sparkle of her rising color that he forgot to pull out Sally’s chair, and fell into a dim confusion. Amory was on the other side, full of confidence and vanity, gazing at her in open admiration.	her rising color

fell into a dim confusion.	The dinner-table glittered with laughter at the confusion of getting places and then curious eyes were turned on her, sitting near the head. She was enjoying this immensely, and Froggy Parker was so engrossed with the added sparkle of her rising color that he forgot to pull out Sally’s chair, and fell into a dim confusion. Amory was on the other side, full of confidence and vanity, gazing at her in open admiration.	became flustered and confused.

Sally’s chair	The dinner-table glittered with laughter at the confusion of getting places and then curious eyes were turned on her, sitting near the head. She was enjoying this immensely, and Froggy Parker was so engrossed with the added sparkle of her rising color that he forgot to pull out Sally’s chair, and fell into a dim confusion. Amory was on the other side, full of confidence and vanity, gazing at her in open admiration.	Sally's chair

open admiration	She was enjoying this immensely, and Froggy Parker was so engrossed with the added sparkle of her rising color that he forgot to pull out Sally’s chair, and fell into a dim confusion. Amory was on the other side, full of confidence and vanity, gazing at her in open admiration. He began directly, and so did Froggy: “I’ve heard a lot about you since you wore braids—” “Wasn’t it funny this afternoon—” Both stopped.	obvious admiration

full of confidence and vanity, gazing at her in open admiration.	She was enjoying this immensely, and Froggy Parker was so engrossed with the added sparkle of her rising color that he forgot to pull out Sally’s chair, and fell into a dim confusion. Amory was on the other side, full of confidence and vanity, gazing at her in open admiration. He began directly, and so did Froggy: “I’ve heard a lot about you since you wore braids—” “Wasn’t it funny this afternoon—” Both stopped.	confident and proud, looking at her with clear admiration.

heard a lot about you since you wore braids—” “Wasn’t it funny this afternoon—” Both stopped.	Amory was on the other side, full of confidence and vanity, gazing at her in open admiration. He began directly, and so did Froggy: “I’ve heard a lot about you since you wore braids—” “Wasn’t it funny this afternoon—” Both stopped. Isabelle turned to Amory shyly.	heard about you since you were young—” “Wasn’t that funny this afternoon—” Both stopped.

turned to Amory shyly.	He began directly, and so did Froggy: “I’ve heard a lot about you since you wore braids—” “Wasn’t it funny this afternoon—” Both stopped. Isabelle turned to Amory shyly. Her face was always enough answer for anyone, but she decided to speak.	looked at Amory shyly.

her right Froggy	She blushed appropriately. On her right Froggy was hors de combat already, although he hadn’t quite realized it. “I’ll tell you what I remembered about you all these years,” Amory continued.	Froggy on her right

was hors de combat already, although he hadn’t quite realized it.	She blushed appropriately. On her right Froggy was hors de combat already, although he hadn’t quite realized it. “I’ll tell you what I remembered about you all these years,” Amory continued.	was already out of the game, although he hadn't quite realized it.

hors de combat	She blushed appropriately. On her right Froggy was hors de combat already, although he hadn’t quite realized it. “I’ll tell you what I remembered about you all these years,” Amory continued.	out of the fight

remembered about you all these years,” Amory continued.	On her right Froggy was hors de combat already, although he hadn’t quite realized it. “I’ll tell you what I remembered about you all these years,” Amory continued. She leaned slightly toward him and looked modestly at the celery before her.	remembered about you all these years," Amory continued.

looked modestly at the celery before her.	“I’ll tell you what I remembered about you all these years,” Amory continued. She leaned slightly toward him and looked modestly at the celery before her. Froggy sighed—he knew Amory, and the situations that Amory seemed born to handle.	looked down at her celery.

situations that Amory seemed born to handle.	She leaned slightly toward him and looked modestly at the celery before her. Froggy sighed—he knew Amory, and the situations that Amory seemed born to handle. He turned to Sally and asked her if she was going away to school next year.	situations Amory was good at dealing with.

away to school next year.	Froggy sighed—he knew Amory, and the situations that Amory seemed born to handle. He turned to Sally and asked her if she was going away to school next year. Amory opened with grapeshot.	going to school next year.

opened with grapeshot.	He turned to Sally and asked her if she was going away to school next year. Amory opened with grapeshot. “I’ve got an adjective that just fits you.”	launched a direct attack.

adjective that just fits you.”	Amory opened with grapeshot. “I’ve got an adjective that just fits you.” This was one of his favorite starts—he seldom had a word in mind, but it was a curiosity provoker, and he could always produce something complimentary if he got in a tight corner.	a word to describe you."

a curiosity provoker	“I’ve got an adjective that just fits you.” This was one of his favorite starts—he seldom had a word in mind, but it was a curiosity provoker, and he could always produce something complimentary if he got in a tight corner. “Oh—what?”	something that makes you curious

got in a tight corner.	“I’ve got an adjective that just fits you.” This was one of his favorite starts—he seldom had a word in mind, but it was a curiosity provoker, and he could always produce something complimentary if he got in a tight corner. “Oh—what?”	backed into a corner.

study in enraptured curiosity.	“Oh—what?” Isabelle’s face was a study in enraptured curiosity. Amory shook his head.	showed intense and fascinated curiosity.

enraptured curiosity	“Oh—what?” Isabelle’s face was a study in enraptured curiosity. Amory shook his head.	fascinated curiosity

Isabelle’s face	“Oh—what?” Isabelle’s face was a study in enraptured curiosity. Amory shook his head.	Isabelle looked fascinated and curious.

touched his under the table.	Amory attempted to make them look even keener. He fancied, but he was not sure, that her foot had just touched his under the table. But it might possibly have been only the table leg.	touched his under the table.

wondered quickly if there would be any difficulty in securing the little den upstairs.	Still it thrilled him. He wondered quickly if there would be any difficulty in securing the little den upstairs.	wondered quickly if he could easily get the small room upstairs.

had very little value in the game they were playing, a game that would presumably be her principal study for years to come.	Isabelle and Amory were distinctly not innocent, nor were they particularly brazen. Moreover, amateur standing had very little value in the game they were playing, a game that would presumably be her principal study for years to come. She had begun as he had, with good looks and an excitable temperament, and the rest was the result of accessible popular novels and dressing-room conversation culled from a slightly older set.	didn't matter much in what they were doing, something she'd likely spend years learning about.

an excitable temperament	Moreover, amateur standing had very little value in the game they were playing, a game that would presumably be her principal study for years to come. She had begun as he had, with good looks and an excitable temperament, and the rest was the result of accessible popular novels and dressing-room conversation culled from a slightly older set. Isabelle had walked with an artificial gait at nine and a half, and when her eyes, wide and starry, proclaimed the ingenue most, Amory was proportionately less deceived.	easily excited

begun as he had, with good looks and an excitable temperament, and the rest was the result of accessible popular novels and dressing-room conversation culled from a slightly older set.	Moreover, amateur standing had very little value in the game they were playing, a game that would presumably be her principal study for years to come. She had begun as he had, with good looks and an excitable temperament, and the rest was the result of accessible popular novels and dressing-room conversation culled from a slightly older set. Isabelle had walked with an artificial gait at nine and a half, and when her eyes, wide and starry, proclaimed the ingenue most, Amory was proportionately less deceived.	started like him, attractive and easily excited, and the rest came from easily available popular books and gossip overheard from older people.

an artificial gait	She had begun as he had, with good looks and an excitable temperament, and the rest was the result of accessible popular novels and dressing-room conversation culled from a slightly older set. Isabelle had walked with an artificial gait at nine and a half, and when her eyes, wide and starry, proclaimed the ingenue most, Amory was proportionately less deceived. He waited for the mask to drop off, but at the same time he did not question her right to wear it.	a fake walk

walked with an artificial gait at nine and a half, and when her eyes, wide and starry, proclaimed the ingenue most, Amory was proportionately less deceived.	She had begun as he had, with good looks and an excitable temperament, and the rest was the result of accessible popular novels and dressing-room conversation culled from a slightly older set. Isabelle had walked with an artificial gait at nine and a half, and when her eyes, wide and starry, proclaimed the ingenue most, Amory was proportionately less deceived. He waited for the mask to drop off, but at the same time he did not question her right to wear it.	walked affectedly from a young age, and the more her wide, innocent eyes tried to play the naive girl, the less Amory was fooled.

blasé sophistication	He waited for the mask to drop off, but at the same time he did not question her right to wear it. She, on her part, was not impressed by his studied air of blasé sophistication. She had lived in a larger city and had slightly an advantage in range.	pretended worldliness

impressed by his studied air of blasé sophistication.	He waited for the mask to drop off, but at the same time he did not question her right to wear it. She, on her part, was not impressed by his studied air of blasé sophistication. She had lived in a larger city and had slightly an advantage in range.	impressed by his fake sophisticated attitude.

coached; he knew that he stood for merely the best game in sight, and that he would have to improve his opportunity before he lost his advantage.	But she accepted his pose—it was one of the dozen little conventions of this kind of affair. He was aware that he was getting this particular favor now because she had been coached; he knew that he stood for merely the best game in sight, and that he would have to improve his opportunity before he lost his advantage. So they proceeded with an infinite guile that would have horrified her parents.	She'd been told to be nice to him; he knew he was just the best option available at the moment and that he needed to make the most of it before someone better came along.

an infinite guile	He was aware that he was getting this particular favor now because she had been coached; he knew that he stood for merely the best game in sight, and that he would have to improve his opportunity before he lost his advantage. So they proceeded with an infinite guile that would have horrified her parents. After the dinner the dance began.	endless deception

guile that would have horrified her parents.	He was aware that he was getting this particular favor now because she had been coached; he knew that he stood for merely the best game in sight, and that he would have to improve his opportunity before he lost his advantage. So they proceeded with an infinite guile that would have horrified her parents. After the dinner the dance began.	deceit that would have shocked her parents.

pressure that said: “You know that your dances are making my evening.”	and “She didn’t like it either—she told me so next time I cut in.” It was true—she told everyone so, and gave every hand a parting pressure that said: “You know that your dances are making my evening.” But time passed, two hours of it, and the less subtle beaux had better learned to focus their pseudo-passionate glances elsewhere, for eleven o’clock found Isabelle and Amory sitting on the couch in the little den off the reading-room upstairs.	a handshake that meant, "You're making my night better by dancing with me."

a parting pressure	and “She didn’t like it either—she told me so next time I cut in.” It was true—she told everyone so, and gave every hand a parting pressure that said: “You know that your dances are making my evening.” But time passed, two hours of it, and the less subtle beaux had better learned to focus their pseudo-passionate glances elsewhere, for eleven o’clock found Isabelle and Amory sitting on the couch in the little den off the reading-room upstairs.	a goodbye handshake

found Isabelle and Amory sitting on the couch in the little den off the reading-room upstairs.	It was true—she told everyone so, and gave every hand a parting pressure that said: “You know that your dances are making my evening.” But time passed, two hours of it, and the less subtle beaux had better learned to focus their pseudo-passionate glances elsewhere, for eleven o’clock found Isabelle and Amory sitting on the couch in the little den off the reading-room upstairs. She was conscious that they were a handsome pair, and seemed to belong distinctively in this seclusion, while lesser lights fluttered and chattered downstairs.	Isabelle and Amory were sitting together on the couch in the small room connected to the upstairs reading room.

the less subtle beaux	It was true—she told everyone so, and gave every hand a parting pressure that said: “You know that your dances are making my evening.” But time passed, two hours of it, and the less subtle beaux had better learned to focus their pseudo-passionate glances elsewhere, for eleven o’clock found Isabelle and Amory sitting on the couch in the little den off the reading-room upstairs. She was conscious that they were a handsome pair, and seemed to belong distinctively in this seclusion, while lesser lights fluttered and chattered downstairs.	the less perceptive admirers

their pseudo-passionate glances	It was true—she told everyone so, and gave every hand a parting pressure that said: “You know that your dances are making my evening.” But time passed, two hours of it, and the less subtle beaux had better learned to focus their pseudo-passionate glances elsewhere, for eleven o’clock found Isabelle and Amory sitting on the couch in the little den off the reading-room upstairs. She was conscious that they were a handsome pair, and seemed to belong distinctively in this seclusion, while lesser lights fluttered and chattered downstairs.	their fake loving looks

eleven o’clock	It was true—she told everyone so, and gave every hand a parting pressure that said: “You know that your dances are making my evening.” But time passed, two hours of it, and the less subtle beaux had better learned to focus their pseudo-passionate glances elsewhere, for eleven o’clock found Isabelle and Amory sitting on the couch in the little den off the reading-room upstairs. She was conscious that they were a handsome pair, and seemed to belong distinctively in this seclusion, while lesser lights fluttered and chattered downstairs.	11 PM

fluttered and chattered downstairs.	But time passed, two hours of it, and the less subtle beaux had better learned to focus their pseudo-passionate glances elsewhere, for eleven o’clock found Isabelle and Amory sitting on the couch in the little den off the reading-room upstairs. She was conscious that they were a handsome pair, and seemed to belong distinctively in this seclusion, while lesser lights fluttered and chattered downstairs. Boys who passed the door looked in enviously—girls who passed only laughed and frowned and grew wise within themselves.	were milling around and talking downstairs.

a handsome pair	But time passed, two hours of it, and the less subtle beaux had better learned to focus their pseudo-passionate glances elsewhere, for eleven o’clock found Isabelle and Amory sitting on the couch in the little den off the reading-room upstairs. She was conscious that they were a handsome pair, and seemed to belong distinctively in this seclusion, while lesser lights fluttered and chattered downstairs. Boys who passed the door looked in enviously—girls who passed only laughed and frowned and grew wise within themselves.	good-looking couple

a very definite stage	Boys who passed the door looked in enviously—girls who passed only laughed and frowned and grew wise within themselves. They had now reached a very definite stage. They had traded accounts of their progress since they had met last, and she had listened to much she had heard before.	a clear point in their development

the Princetonian board	They had traded accounts of their progress since they had met last, and she had listened to much she had heard before. He was a sophomore, was on the Princetonian board, hoped to be chairman in senior year. He learned that some of the boys she went with in Baltimore were “terrible speeds” and came to dances in states of artificial stimulation; most of them were twenty or so, and drove alluring red Stutzes.	the student newspaper staff

some of the boys she went with in Baltimore were “terrible speeds” and came to dances in states of artificial stimulation; most of them were twenty or so, and drove alluring red Stutzes.	He was a sophomore, was on the Princetonian board, hoped to be chairman in senior year. He learned that some of the boys she went with in Baltimore were “terrible speeds” and came to dances in states of artificial stimulation; most of them were twenty or so, and drove alluring red Stutzes. A good half seemed to have already flunked out of various schools and colleges, but some of them bore athletic names that made him look at her admiringly.	Some of the guys she hung out with in Baltimore were reckless thrill-seekers who showed up to parties high; most of them were around twenty and drove flashy red Stutz cars.

alluring red Stutzes	He was a sophomore, was on the Princetonian board, hoped to be chairman in senior year. He learned that some of the boys she went with in Baltimore were “terrible speeds” and came to dances in states of artificial stimulation; most of them were twenty or so, and drove alluring red Stutzes. A good half seemed to have already flunked out of various schools and colleges, but some of them bore athletic names that made him look at her admiringly.	attractive red Stutz cars

artificial stimulation	He was a sophomore, was on the Princetonian board, hoped to be chairman in senior year. He learned that some of the boys she went with in Baltimore were “terrible speeds” and came to dances in states of artificial stimulation; most of them were twenty or so, and drove alluring red Stutzes. A good half seemed to have already flunked out of various schools and colleges, but some of them bore athletic names that made him look at her admiringly.	high on drugs

names that made him look at her admiringly.	He learned that some of the boys she went with in Baltimore were “terrible speeds” and came to dances in states of artificial stimulation; most of them were twenty or so, and drove alluring red Stutzes. A good half seemed to have already flunked out of various schools and colleges, but some of them bore athletic names that made him look at her admiringly. As a matter of fact, Isabelle’s closer acquaintance with the universities was just commencing.	names that impressed him.

acquaintance with the universities was just commencing.	A good half seemed to have already flunked out of various schools and colleges, but some of them bore athletic names that made him look at her admiringly. As a matter of fact, Isabelle’s closer acquaintance with the universities was just commencing. She had bowing acquaintance with a lot of young men who thought she was a “pretty kid—worth keeping an eye on.”	She was just starting to get to know people from the universities.

Isabelle’s closer acquaintance	A good half seemed to have already flunked out of various schools and colleges, but some of them bore athletic names that made him look at her admiringly. As a matter of fact, Isabelle’s closer acquaintance with the universities was just commencing. She had bowing acquaintance with a lot of young men who thought she was a “pretty kid—worth keeping an eye on.”	Isabelle's deeper involvement

lot of young men who thought she was a “pretty kid—worth keeping an eye on.”	As a matter of fact, Isabelle’s closer acquaintance with the universities was just commencing. She had bowing acquaintance with a lot of young men who thought she was a “pretty kid—worth keeping an eye on.” But Isabelle strung the names into a fabrication of gayety that would have dazzled a Viennese nobleman.	many young men who thought she was cute and worth watching.

fabrication of gayety that would have dazzled a Viennese nobleman.	She had bowing acquaintance with a lot of young men who thought she was a “pretty kid—worth keeping an eye on.” But Isabelle strung the names into a fabrication of gayety that would have dazzled a Viennese nobleman. Such is the power of young contralto voices on sink-down sofas.	a made-up image of fun that would have impressed a sophisticated European.

a Viennese nobleman	She had bowing acquaintance with a lot of young men who thought she was a “pretty kid—worth keeping an eye on.” But Isabelle strung the names into a fabrication of gayety that would have dazzled a Viennese nobleman. Such is the power of young contralto voices on sink-down sofas.	a rich, sophisticated European man

power of young contralto voices on sink-down sofas.	But Isabelle strung the names into a fabrication of gayety that would have dazzled a Viennese nobleman. Such is the power of young contralto voices on sink-down sofas. He asked her if she thought he was conceited.	Young women with deep, rich voices have a captivating effect when they're lounging comfortably.

sink-down sofas	But Isabelle strung the names into a fabrication of gayety that would have dazzled a Viennese nobleman. Such is the power of young contralto voices on sink-down sofas. He asked her if she thought he was conceited.	soft, comfortable sofas

young contralto voices	But Isabelle strung the names into a fabrication of gayety that would have dazzled a Viennese nobleman. Such is the power of young contralto voices on sink-down sofas. He asked her if she thought he was conceited.	young women with low singing voices

asked her if she thought he was conceited.	Such is the power of young contralto voices on sink-down sofas. He asked her if she thought he was conceited. She said there was a difference between conceit and self-confidence.	asked her if she thought he was arrogant.

difference between conceit and self-confidence.	He asked her if she thought he was conceited. She said there was a difference between conceit and self-confidence. She adored self-confidence in men.	Conceit and self-confidence are not the same thing.

a bum dancer	“Rather—why?” “He’s a bum dancer.” Amory laughed.	a bad dancer

dances as if the girl were on his back instead of in his arms.”	Amory laughed. “He dances as if the girl were on his back instead of in his arms.” She appreciated this.	He dances like he's carrying her, not holding her.

awfully nice hands	Then they talked about hands. “You’ve got awfully nice hands,” she said. “They look as if you played the piano.	very nice hands

look as if you played the piano.	“You’ve got awfully nice hands,” she said. “They look as if you played the piano. Do you?”	look like you play the piano.

nay, more, a very critical stage.	Do you?” I have said they had reached a very definite stage—nay, more, a very critical stage. Amory had stayed over a day to see her, and his train left at twelve-eighteen that night.	Actually, it was a very critical stage.

a very definite stage	Do you?” I have said they had reached a very definite stage—nay, more, a very critical stage. Amory had stayed over a day to see her, and his train left at twelve-eighteen that night.	a very serious point

left at twelve-eighteen that night.	I have said they had reached a very definite stage—nay, more, a very critical stage. Amory had stayed over a day to see her, and his train left at twelve-eighteen that night. His trunk and suitcase awaited him at the station; his watch was beginning to hang heavy in his pocket.	was leaving at 12:18 that night.

talking lightly about “that funny look in her eyes,” and Isabelle knew from the change in his manner what was coming—indeed, she had been wondering how soon it would come.	“Isabelle,” he said suddenly, “I want to tell you something.” They had been talking lightly about “that funny look in her eyes,” and Isabelle knew from the change in his manner what was coming—indeed, she had been wondering how soon it would come. Amory reached above their heads and turned out the electric light, so that they were in the dark, except for the red glow that fell through the door from the reading-room lamps.	chatting casually about "that strange expression she had," and Isabelle realized from his shift in tone what was about to happen—in fact, she'd been anticipating it.

were in the dark, except for the red glow that fell through the door from the reading-room lamps.	They had been talking lightly about “that funny look in her eyes,” and Isabelle knew from the change in his manner what was coming—indeed, she had been wondering how soon it would come. Amory reached above their heads and turned out the electric light, so that they were in the dark, except for the red glow that fell through the door from the reading-room lamps. Then he began: “I don’t know whether or not you know what you—what I’m going to say.	were in the dark, except for the red light coming through the door from the lamps in the reading room.

meet again like this—I have darned hard luck sometimes.”	“I know,” said Isabelle softly. “Maybe we’ll never meet again like this—I have darned hard luck sometimes.” He was leaning away from her on the other arm of the lounge, but she could see his eyes plainly in the dark.	meet again like this—I'm just really unlucky sometimes."

see his eyes plainly in the dark.	“Maybe we’ll never meet again like this—I have darned hard luck sometimes.” He was leaning away from her on the other arm of the lounge, but she could see his eyes plainly in the dark. “You’ll meet me again—silly.”	see his eyes clearly in the dark.

became almost a term of endearment.	“You’ll meet me again—silly.” There was just the slightest emphasis on the last word—so that it became almost a term of endearment. He continued a bit huskily: “I’ve fallen for a lot of people—girls—and I guess you have, too—boys, I mean, but, honestly, you—” he broke off suddenly and leaned forward, chin on his hands: “Oh, what’s the use—you’ll go your way and I suppose I’ll go mine.”	It almost sounded like a sweet name.

chin on his hands: “Oh, what’s the use—you’ll go your way and I suppose I’ll go mine.”	There was just the slightest emphasis on the last word—so that it became almost a term of endearment. He continued a bit huskily: “I’ve fallen for a lot of people—girls—and I guess you have, too—boys, I mean, but, honestly, you—” he broke off suddenly and leaned forward, chin on his hands: “Oh, what’s the use—you’ll go your way and I suppose I’ll go mine.” Silence for a moment.	"Oh, what's the point? You'll do what you want, and I guess I'll do what I want."

the faint light	Silence for a moment. Isabelle was quite stirred; she wound her handkerchief into a tight ball, and by the faint light that streamed over her, dropped it deliberately on the floor. Their hands touched for an instant, but neither spoke.	the dim light

streamed over her, dropped it deliberately on the floor.	Silence for a moment. Isabelle was quite stirred; she wound her handkerchief into a tight ball, and by the faint light that streamed over her, dropped it deliberately on the floor. Their hands touched for an instant, but neither spoke.	shining on her, she intentionally dropped it on the floor.

another stray couple	Silences were becoming more frequent and more delicious. Outside another stray couple had come up and were experimenting on the piano in the next room. After the usual preliminary of “chopsticks,” one of them started “Babes in the Woods” and a light tenor carried the words into the den: “Give me your hand– I’ll understand We’re off to slumberland.”	another random couple

understand We’re off to slumberland.”	Outside another stray couple had come up and were experimenting on the piano in the next room. After the usual preliminary of “chopsticks,” one of them started “Babes in the Woods” and a light tenor carried the words into the den: “Give me your hand– I’ll understand We’re off to slumberland.” Isabelle hummed it softly and trembled as she felt Amory’s hand close over hers.	understand, we're going to dreamland.

a light tenor	Outside another stray couple had come up and were experimenting on the piano in the next room. After the usual preliminary of “chopsticks,” one of them started “Babes in the Woods” and a light tenor carried the words into the den: “Give me your hand– I’ll understand We’re off to slumberland.” Isabelle hummed it softly and trembled as she felt Amory’s hand close over hers.	a high-pitched male voice

felt Amory’s hand close over hers.	After the usual preliminary of “chopsticks,” one of them started “Babes in the Woods” and a light tenor carried the words into the den: “Give me your hand– I’ll understand We’re off to slumberland.” Isabelle hummed it softly and trembled as she felt Amory’s hand close over hers. “Isabelle,” he whispered.	felt Amory's hand squeeze hers.

give a darn about me.”	“You know I’m mad about you. You do give a darn about me.” “Yes.”	care about me.

bent so near that he felt her breath against his cheek.	“No.” He could scarcely hear her, although he bent so near that he felt her breath against his cheek. “Isabelle, I’m going back to college for six long months, and why shouldn’t we—if I could only just have one thing to remember you by—” “Close the door.”	leaned in so close he could feel her breath on his cheek.

stirred so that he half wondered whether she had spoken at all.	“Isabelle, I’m going back to college for six long months, and why shouldn’t we—if I could only just have one thing to remember you by—” “Close the door.” Her voice had just stirred so that he half wondered whether she had spoken at all. As he swung the door softly shut, the music seemed quivering just outside.	spoken so softly he almost wasn't sure if she'd said anything.

swung the door softly shut, the music seemed quivering just outside.	Her voice had just stirred so that he half wondered whether she had spoken at all. As he swung the door softly shut, the music seemed quivering just outside. “Moonlight is bright, Kiss me good night.”	closed the door quietly, the music seemed to be vibrating just outside.

scene in the den, with their hands clinging and the inevitable looming charmingly close.	“Moonlight is bright, Kiss me good night.” What a wonderful song, she thought—everything was wonderful tonight, most of all this romantic scene in the den, with their hands clinging and the inevitable looming charmingly close. The future vista of her life seemed an unending succession of scenes like this: under moonlight and pale starlight, and in the backs of warm limousines and in low, cosy roadsters stopped under sheltering trees—only the boy might change, and this one was so nice.	scene in the living room, their hands holding tightly and a kiss about to happen.

warm limousines	What a wonderful song, she thought—everything was wonderful tonight, most of all this romantic scene in the den, with their hands clinging and the inevitable looming charmingly close. The future vista of her life seemed an unending succession of scenes like this: under moonlight and pale starlight, and in the backs of warm limousines and in low, cosy roadsters stopped under sheltering trees—only the boy might change, and this one was so nice. He took her hand softly.	heated cars

low, cosy roadsters	What a wonderful song, she thought—everything was wonderful tonight, most of all this romantic scene in the den, with their hands clinging and the inevitable looming charmingly close. The future vista of her life seemed an unending succession of scenes like this: under moonlight and pale starlight, and in the backs of warm limousines and in low, cosy roadsters stopped under sheltering trees—only the boy might change, and this one was so nice. He took her hand softly.	small, comfortable convertibles

pale starlight	What a wonderful song, she thought—everything was wonderful tonight, most of all this romantic scene in the den, with their hands clinging and the inevitable looming charmingly close. The future vista of her life seemed an unending succession of scenes like this: under moonlight and pale starlight, and in the backs of warm limousines and in low, cosy roadsters stopped under sheltering trees—only the boy might change, and this one was so nice. He took her hand softly.	faint starlight

an unending succession	What a wonderful song, she thought—everything was wonderful tonight, most of all this romantic scene in the den, with their hands clinging and the inevitable looming charmingly close. The future vista of her life seemed an unending succession of scenes like this: under moonlight and pale starlight, and in the backs of warm limousines and in low, cosy roadsters stopped under sheltering trees—only the boy might change, and this one was so nice. He took her hand softly.	never-ending series

succession of scenes like this: under moonlight and pale starlight, and in the backs of warm limousines and in low, cosy roadsters stopped under sheltering trees—only the boy might change, and this one was so nice.	What a wonderful song, she thought—everything was wonderful tonight, most of all this romantic scene in the den, with their hands clinging and the inevitable looming charmingly close. The future vista of her life seemed an unending succession of scenes like this: under moonlight and pale starlight, and in the backs of warm limousines and in low, cosy roadsters stopped under sheltering trees—only the boy might change, and this one was so nice. He took her hand softly.	a future filled with similar romantic moments: under the moon and stars, in the back of comfortable cars, and in cozy convertibles parked under trees—only the guy might be different, and she really liked this one.

running footsteps	Lips half parted, she turned her head to him in the dark. Suddenly the ring of voices, the sound of running footsteps surged toward them. Quick as a flash Amory reached up and turned on the light, and when the door opened and three boys, the wrathy and dance-craving Froggy among them, rushed in, he was turning over the magazines on the table, while she sat without moving, serene and unembarrassed, and even greeted them with a welcoming smile.	running footsteps

ring of voices, the sound of running footsteps surged toward them.	Lips half parted, she turned her head to him in the dark. Suddenly the ring of voices, the sound of running footsteps surged toward them. Quick as a flash Amory reached up and turned on the light, and when the door opened and three boys, the wrathy and dance-craving Froggy among them, rushed in, he was turning over the magazines on the table, while she sat without moving, serene and unembarrassed, and even greeted them with a welcoming smile.	The sound of voices and running feet rushed toward them.

a flash Amory	Suddenly the ring of voices, the sound of running footsteps surged toward them. Quick as a flash Amory reached up and turned on the light, and when the door opened and three boys, the wrathy and dance-craving Froggy among them, rushed in, he was turning over the magazines on the table, while she sat without moving, serene and unembarrassed, and even greeted them with a welcoming smile. But her heart was beating wildly, and she felt somehow as if she had been deprived.	Quick as a flash Amory

sat without moving, serene and unembarrassed, and even greeted them with a welcoming smile.	Suddenly the ring of voices, the sound of running footsteps surged toward them. Quick as a flash Amory reached up and turned on the light, and when the door opened and three boys, the wrathy and dance-craving Froggy among them, rushed in, he was turning over the magazines on the table, while she sat without moving, serene and unembarrassed, and even greeted them with a welcoming smile. But her heart was beating wildly, and she felt somehow as if she had been deprived.	sat still, calm, and not embarrassed, even smiling to greet them.

dance-craving Froggy	Suddenly the ring of voices, the sound of running footsteps surged toward them. Quick as a flash Amory reached up and turned on the light, and when the door opened and three boys, the wrathy and dance-craving Froggy among them, rushed in, he was turning over the magazines on the table, while she sat without moving, serene and unembarrassed, and even greeted them with a welcoming smile. But her heart was beating wildly, and she felt somehow as if she had been deprived.	Froggy, who loved to dance

passed between them—on his side despair, on hers regret, and then the evening went on, with the reassured beaux and the eternal cutting in.	It was evidently over. There was a clamor for a dance, there was a glance that passed between them—on his side despair, on hers regret, and then the evening went on, with the reassured beaux and the eternal cutting in. At quarter to twelve Amory shook hands with her gravely, in the midst of a small crowd assembled to wish him good-speed.	between them he looked despairing, she looked regretful, and the party continued with the guys who were now confident and the constant interruptions.

the reassured beaux	It was evidently over. There was a clamor for a dance, there was a glance that passed between them—on his side despair, on hers regret, and then the evening went on, with the reassured beaux and the eternal cutting in. At quarter to twelve Amory shook hands with her gravely, in the midst of a small crowd assembled to wish him good-speed.	the guys who were now confident they still had a chance

his side despair	It was evidently over. There was a clamor for a dance, there was a glance that passed between them—on his side despair, on hers regret, and then the evening went on, with the reassured beaux and the eternal cutting in. At quarter to twelve Amory shook hands with her gravely, in the midst of a small crowd assembled to wish him good-speed.	He was filled with despair.

quarter to twelve Amory shook hands with her gravely, in the midst of a small crowd assembled to wish him good-speed.	There was a clamor for a dance, there was a glance that passed between them—on his side despair, on hers regret, and then the evening went on, with the reassured beaux and the eternal cutting in. At quarter to twelve Amory shook hands with her gravely, in the midst of a small crowd assembled to wish him good-speed. For an instant he lost his poise, and she felt a bit rattled when a satirical voice from a concealed wit cried: “Take her outside, Amory!”	At 11:45, Amory shook her hand seriously, surrounded by a small group of people wishing him well.

a satirical voice	At quarter to twelve Amory shook hands with her gravely, in the midst of a small crowd assembled to wish him good-speed. For an instant he lost his poise, and she felt a bit rattled when a satirical voice from a concealed wit cried: “Take her outside, Amory!” As he took her hand he pressed it a little, and she returned the pressure as she had done to twenty hands that evening—that was all.	a sarcastic voice

rattled when a satirical voice from a concealed wit cried: “Take her outside, Amory!”	At quarter to twelve Amory shook hands with her gravely, in the midst of a small crowd assembled to wish him good-speed. For an instant he lost his poise, and she felt a bit rattled when a satirical voice from a concealed wit cried: “Take her outside, Amory!” As he took her hand he pressed it a little, and she returned the pressure as she had done to twenty hands that evening—that was all.	flustered when a sarcastic person in the crowd yelled, "Take her outside, Amory!"

a concealed wit	At quarter to twelve Amory shook hands with her gravely, in the midst of a small crowd assembled to wish him good-speed. For an instant he lost his poise, and she felt a bit rattled when a satirical voice from a concealed wit cried: “Take her outside, Amory!” As he took her hand he pressed it a little, and she returned the pressure as she had done to twenty hands that evening—that was all.	someone making a joke from the background

returned the pressure as she had done to twenty hands that evening—that was all.	For an instant he lost his poise, and she felt a bit rattled when a satirical voice from a concealed wit cried: “Take her outside, Amory!” As he took her hand he pressed it a little, and she returned the pressure as she had done to twenty hands that evening—that was all. At two o’clock back at the Weatherbys’ Sally asked her if she and Amory had had a “time” in the den.	She squeezed back like she had with twenty other hands that night—it meant nothing.

back at the Weatherbys’ Sally asked her if she and Amory had had a “time” in the den.	As he took her hand he pressed it a little, and she returned the pressure as she had done to twenty hands that evening—that was all. At two o’clock back at the Weatherbys’ Sally asked her if she and Amory had had a “time” in the den. Isabelle turned to her quietly.	Back at the Weatherbys' house, Sally asked her if she and Amory had been making out in the den.

two o’clock	As he took her hand he pressed it a little, and she returned the pressure as she had done to twenty hands that evening—that was all. At two o’clock back at the Weatherbys’ Sally asked her if she and Amory had had a “time” in the den. Isabelle turned to her quietly.	2 AM

turned to her quietly.	At two o’clock back at the Weatherbys’ Sally asked her if she and Amory had had a “time” in the den. Isabelle turned to her quietly. In her eyes was the light of the idealist, the inviolate dreamer of Joan-like dreams.	quietly turned to her.

the inviolate dreamer	Isabelle turned to her quietly. In her eyes was the light of the idealist, the inviolate dreamer of Joan-like dreams. “No,” she answered.	the untouched dreamer

was the light of the idealist, the inviolate dreamer of Joan-like dreams.	Isabelle turned to her quietly. In her eyes was the light of the idealist, the inviolate dreamer of Joan-like dreams. “No,” she answered.	She had the bright hope of an idealist, a pure dreamer dreaming of noble deeds.

crept in bed she wondered what he’d say in his special delivery tomorrow.	“I don’t do that sort of thing any more; he asked me to, but I said no.” As she crept in bed she wondered what he’d say in his special delivery tomorrow. He had such a good-looking mouth—would she ever—?	As she got into bed, she wondered what he'd say in his special delivery letter tomorrow.

Fourteen angels	He had such a good-looking mouth—would she ever—? “Fourteen angels were watching o’er them,” sang Sally sleepily from the next room. “Damn!” muttered Isabelle, punching the pillow into a luxurious lump and exploring the cold sheets cautiously.	Fourteen angels

sang Sally sleepily from the next room.	He had such a good-looking mouth—would she ever—? “Fourteen angels were watching o’er them,” sang Sally sleepily from the next room. “Damn!” muttered Isabelle, punching the pillow into a luxurious lump and exploring the cold sheets cautiously.	Sally sang sleepily from the next room.

muttered Isabelle, punching the pillow into a luxurious lump and exploring the cold sheets cautiously.	“Fourteen angels were watching o’er them,” sang Sally sleepily from the next room. “Damn!” muttered Isabelle, punching the pillow into a luxurious lump and exploring the cold sheets cautiously. “Damn!”	Isabelle muttered and punched her pillow into a comfortable shape, then carefully felt around the cold sheets.

a luxurious lump	“Fourteen angels were watching o’er them,” sang Sally sleepily from the next room. “Damn!” muttered Isabelle, punching the pillow into a luxurious lump and exploring the cold sheets cautiously. “Damn!”	a comfortable lump

way of the Princetonian, had arrived.	Amory, by way of the Princetonian, had arrived. The minor snobs, finely balanced thermometers of success, warmed to him as the club elections grew nigh, and he and Tom were visited by groups of upper classmen who arrived awkwardly, balanced on the edge of the furniture and talked of all subjects except the one of absorbing interest.	had arrived, thanks to his work on the Princetonian (the university newspaper).

absorbing interest	Amory, by way of the Princetonian, had arrived. The minor snobs, finely balanced thermometers of success, warmed to him as the club elections grew nigh, and he and Tom were visited by groups of upper classmen who arrived awkwardly, balanced on the edge of the furniture and talked of all subjects except the one of absorbing interest. Amory was amused at the intent eyes upon him, and, in case the visitors represented some club in which he was not interested, took great pleasure in shocking them with unorthodox remarks.	the thing they really cared about

finely balanced thermometers	Amory, by way of the Princetonian, had arrived. The minor snobs, finely balanced thermometers of success, warmed to him as the club elections grew nigh, and he and Tom were visited by groups of upper classmen who arrived awkwardly, balanced on the edge of the furniture and talked of all subjects except the one of absorbing interest. Amory was amused at the intent eyes upon him, and, in case the visitors represented some club in which he was not interested, took great pleasure in shocking them with unorthodox remarks.	very sensitive to social status

The minor snobs	Amory, by way of the Princetonian, had arrived. The minor snobs, finely balanced thermometers of success, warmed to him as the club elections grew nigh, and he and Tom were visited by groups of upper classmen who arrived awkwardly, balanced on the edge of the furniture and talked of all subjects except the one of absorbing interest. Amory was amused at the intent eyes upon him, and, in case the visitors represented some club in which he was not interested, took great pleasure in shocking them with unorthodox remarks.	The less important social climbers

snobs, finely balanced thermometers of success, warmed to him as the club elections grew nigh, and he and Tom were visited by groups of upper classmen who arrived awkwardly, balanced on the edge of the furniture and talked of all subjects except the one of absorbing interest.	Amory, by way of the Princetonian, had arrived. The minor snobs, finely balanced thermometers of success, warmed to him as the club elections grew nigh, and he and Tom were visited by groups of upper classmen who arrived awkwardly, balanced on the edge of the furniture and talked of all subjects except the one of absorbing interest. Amory was amused at the intent eyes upon him, and, in case the visitors represented some club in which he was not interested, took great pleasure in shocking them with unorthodox remarks.	The snobs, who were good at recognizing success, started liking him as club elections approached. He and Tom were visited by upperclassmen who came uncomfortably, sat on the edge of chairs, and talked about everything but what they really wanted to know.

upper classmen	Amory, by way of the Princetonian, had arrived. The minor snobs, finely balanced thermometers of success, warmed to him as the club elections grew nigh, and he and Tom were visited by groups of upper classmen who arrived awkwardly, balanced on the edge of the furniture and talked of all subjects except the one of absorbing interest. Amory was amused at the intent eyes upon him, and, in case the visitors represented some club in which he was not interested, took great pleasure in shocking them with unorthodox remarks.	older students

took great pleasure in shocking them with unorthodox remarks.	The minor snobs, finely balanced thermometers of success, warmed to him as the club elections grew nigh, and he and Tom were visited by groups of upper classmen who arrived awkwardly, balanced on the edge of the furniture and talked of all subjects except the one of absorbing interest. Amory was amused at the intent eyes upon him, and, in case the visitors represented some club in which he was not interested, took great pleasure in shocking them with unorthodox remarks. “Oh, let me see—” he said one night to a flabbergasted delegation, “what club do you represent?”	He enjoyed shocking them with unusual comments.

unorthodox remarks	The minor snobs, finely balanced thermometers of success, warmed to him as the club elections grew nigh, and he and Tom were visited by groups of upper classmen who arrived awkwardly, balanced on the edge of the furniture and talked of all subjects except the one of absorbing interest. Amory was amused at the intent eyes upon him, and, in case the visitors represented some club in which he was not interested, took great pleasure in shocking them with unorthodox remarks. “Oh, let me see—” he said one night to a flabbergasted delegation, “what club do you represent?”	unconventional comments

said one night to a flabbergasted delegation, “what club do you represent?”	Amory was amused at the intent eyes upon him, and, in case the visitors represented some club in which he was not interested, took great pleasure in shocking them with unorthodox remarks. “Oh, let me see—” he said one night to a flabbergasted delegation, “what club do you represent?” With visitors from Ivy and Cottage and Tiger Inn he played the “nice, unspoilt, ingenuous boy” very much at ease and quite unaware of the object of the call.	asked a stunned group one night, "Which club are you from?"

a flabbergasted delegation	Amory was amused at the intent eyes upon him, and, in case the visitors represented some club in which he was not interested, took great pleasure in shocking them with unorthodox remarks. “Oh, let me see—” he said one night to a flabbergasted delegation, “what club do you represent?” With visitors from Ivy and Cottage and Tiger Inn he played the “nice, unspoilt, ingenuous boy” very much at ease and quite unaware of the object of the call.	a shocked group

visitors from Ivy and Cottage and Tiger Inn he played the “nice, unspoilt, ingenuous boy” very much at ease and quite unaware of the object of the call.	“Oh, let me see—” he said one night to a flabbergasted delegation, “what club do you represent?” With visitors from Ivy and Cottage and Tiger Inn he played the “nice, unspoilt, ingenuous boy” very much at ease and quite unaware of the object of the call. When the fatal morning arrived, early in March, and the campus became a document in hysteria, he slid smoothly into Cottage with Alec Connage and watched his suddenly neurotic class with much wonder.	He acted like a naive and innocent boy, completely relaxed and pretending not to know why the visitors from Ivy, Cottage, and Tiger Inn were there.

Ivy and Cottage and Tiger Inn	“Oh, let me see—” he said one night to a flabbergasted delegation, “what club do you represent?” With visitors from Ivy and Cottage and Tiger Inn he played the “nice, unspoilt, ingenuous boy” very much at ease and quite unaware of the object of the call. When the fatal morning arrived, early in March, and the campus became a document in hysteria, he slid smoothly into Cottage with Alec Connage and watched his suddenly neurotic class with much wonder.	Ivy, Cottage, and Tiger Inn

the “nice, unspoilt, ingenuous boy	“Oh, let me see—” he said one night to a flabbergasted delegation, “what club do you represent?” With visitors from Ivy and Cottage and Tiger Inn he played the “nice, unspoilt, ingenuous boy” very much at ease and quite unaware of the object of the call. When the fatal morning arrived, early in March, and the campus became a document in hysteria, he slid smoothly into Cottage with Alec Connage and watched his suddenly neurotic class with much wonder.	the "sweet, innocent, clueless boy"

his suddenly neurotic class	With visitors from Ivy and Cottage and Tiger Inn he played the “nice, unspoilt, ingenuous boy” very much at ease and quite unaware of the object of the call. When the fatal morning arrived, early in March, and the campus became a document in hysteria, he slid smoothly into Cottage with Alec Connage and watched his suddenly neurotic class with much wonder. There were fickle groups that jumped from club to club; there were friends of two or three days who announced tearfully and wildly that they must join the same club, nothing should separate them; there were snarling disclosures of long-hidden grudges as the Suddenly Prominent remembered snubs of freshman year.	his suddenly anxious classmates

document in hysteria, he slid smoothly into Cottage with Alec Connage and watched his suddenly neurotic class with much wonder.	With visitors from Ivy and Cottage and Tiger Inn he played the “nice, unspoilt, ingenuous boy” very much at ease and quite unaware of the object of the call. When the fatal morning arrived, early in March, and the campus became a document in hysteria, he slid smoothly into Cottage with Alec Connage and watched his suddenly neurotic class with much wonder. There were fickle groups that jumped from club to club; there were friends of two or three days who announced tearfully and wildly that they must join the same club, nothing should separate them; there were snarling disclosures of long-hidden grudges as the Suddenly Prominent remembered snubs of freshman year.	a scene of madness, he easily went to Cottage with Alec Connage and watched his classmates, who had suddenly become anxious, with great surprise.

snarling disclosures of long-hidden grudges as the Suddenly Prominent remembered snubs of freshman year.	When the fatal morning arrived, early in March, and the campus became a document in hysteria, he slid smoothly into Cottage with Alec Connage and watched his suddenly neurotic class with much wonder. There were fickle groups that jumped from club to club; there were friends of two or three days who announced tearfully and wildly that they must join the same club, nothing should separate them; there were snarling disclosures of long-hidden grudges as the Suddenly Prominent remembered snubs of freshman year. Unknown men were elevated into importance when they received certain coveted bids; others who were considered “all set” found that they had made unexpected enemies, felt themselves stranded and deserted, talked wildly of leaving college.	People who suddenly became popular revealed old grudges, remembering insults from their first year.

the Suddenly Prominent remembered snubs	When the fatal morning arrived, early in March, and the campus became a document in hysteria, he slid smoothly into Cottage with Alec Connage and watched his suddenly neurotic class with much wonder. There were fickle groups that jumped from club to club; there were friends of two or three days who announced tearfully and wildly that they must join the same club, nothing should separate them; there were snarling disclosures of long-hidden grudges as the Suddenly Prominent remembered snubs of freshman year. Unknown men were elevated into importance when they received certain coveted bids; others who were considered “all set” found that they had made unexpected enemies, felt themselves stranded and deserted, talked wildly of leaving college.	those who suddenly became important remembered being insulted

freshman year	When the fatal morning arrived, early in March, and the campus became a document in hysteria, he slid smoothly into Cottage with Alec Connage and watched his suddenly neurotic class with much wonder. There were fickle groups that jumped from club to club; there were friends of two or three days who announced tearfully and wildly that they must join the same club, nothing should separate them; there were snarling disclosures of long-hidden grudges as the Suddenly Prominent remembered snubs of freshman year. Unknown men were elevated into importance when they received certain coveted bids; others who were considered “all set” found that they had made unexpected enemies, felt themselves stranded and deserted, talked wildly of leaving college.	first year of college

fickle groups	When the fatal morning arrived, early in March, and the campus became a document in hysteria, he slid smoothly into Cottage with Alec Connage and watched his suddenly neurotic class with much wonder. There were fickle groups that jumped from club to club; there were friends of two or three days who announced tearfully and wildly that they must join the same club, nothing should separate them; there were snarling disclosures of long-hidden grudges as the Suddenly Prominent remembered snubs of freshman year. Unknown men were elevated into importance when they received certain coveted bids; others who were considered “all set” found that they had made unexpected enemies, felt themselves stranded and deserted, talked wildly of leaving college.	groups that changed their minds easily

long-hidden grudges	When the fatal morning arrived, early in March, and the campus became a document in hysteria, he slid smoothly into Cottage with Alec Connage and watched his suddenly neurotic class with much wonder. There were fickle groups that jumped from club to club; there were friends of two or three days who announced tearfully and wildly that they must join the same club, nothing should separate them; there were snarling disclosures of long-hidden grudges as the Suddenly Prominent remembered snubs of freshman year. Unknown men were elevated into importance when they received certain coveted bids; others who were considered “all set” found that they had made unexpected enemies, felt themselves stranded and deserted, talked wildly of leaving college.	grudges hidden for a long time

all set” found that they had made unexpected enemies, felt themselves stranded and deserted, talked wildly of leaving college.	There were fickle groups that jumped from club to club; there were friends of two or three days who announced tearfully and wildly that they must join the same club, nothing should separate them; there were snarling disclosures of long-hidden grudges as the Suddenly Prominent remembered snubs of freshman year. Unknown men were elevated into importance when they received certain coveted bids; others who were considered “all set” found that they had made unexpected enemies, felt themselves stranded and deserted, talked wildly of leaving college. In his own crowd Amory saw men kept out for wearing green hats, for being “a damn tailor’s dummy,” for having “too much pull in heaven,” for getting drunk one night “not like a gentleman, by God,” or for unfathomable secret reasons known to no one but the wielders of the black balls.	seemed sure to get in" found they had unknowingly made enemies, felt alone and abandoned, and talked seriously about dropping out of college.

certain coveted bids	There were fickle groups that jumped from club to club; there were friends of two or three days who announced tearfully and wildly that they must join the same club, nothing should separate them; there were snarling disclosures of long-hidden grudges as the Suddenly Prominent remembered snubs of freshman year. Unknown men were elevated into importance when they received certain coveted bids; others who were considered “all set” found that they had made unexpected enemies, felt themselves stranded and deserted, talked wildly of leaving college. In his own crowd Amory saw men kept out for wearing green hats, for being “a damn tailor’s dummy,” for having “too much pull in heaven,” for getting drunk one night “not like a gentleman, by God,” or for unfathomable secret reasons known to no one but the wielders of the black balls.	highly desired invitations

unfathomable secret reasons	Unknown men were elevated into importance when they received certain coveted bids; others who were considered “all set” found that they had made unexpected enemies, felt themselves stranded and deserted, talked wildly of leaving college. In his own crowd Amory saw men kept out for wearing green hats, for being “a damn tailor’s dummy,” for having “too much pull in heaven,” for getting drunk one night “not like a gentleman, by God,” or for unfathomable secret reasons known to no one but the wielders of the black balls. This orgy of sociability culminated in a gigantic party at the Nassau Inn, where punch was dispensed from immense bowls, and the whole downstairs became a delirious, circulating, shouting pattern of faces and voices.	reasons no one could understand

known to no one but the wielders of the black balls.	Unknown men were elevated into importance when they received certain coveted bids; others who were considered “all set” found that they had made unexpected enemies, felt themselves stranded and deserted, talked wildly of leaving college. In his own crowd Amory saw men kept out for wearing green hats, for being “a damn tailor’s dummy,” for having “too much pull in heaven,” for getting drunk one night “not like a gentleman, by God,” or for unfathomable secret reasons known to no one but the wielders of the black balls. This orgy of sociability culminated in a gigantic party at the Nassau Inn, where punch was dispensed from immense bowls, and the whole downstairs became a delirious, circulating, shouting pattern of faces and voices.	known only to those in charge.

a damn tailor’s dummy	Unknown men were elevated into importance when they received certain coveted bids; others who were considered “all set” found that they had made unexpected enemies, felt themselves stranded and deserted, talked wildly of leaving college. In his own crowd Amory saw men kept out for wearing green hats, for being “a damn tailor’s dummy,” for having “too much pull in heaven,” for getting drunk one night “not like a gentleman, by God,” or for unfathomable secret reasons known to no one but the wielders of the black balls. This orgy of sociability culminated in a gigantic party at the Nassau Inn, where punch was dispensed from immense bowls, and the whole downstairs became a delirious, circulating, shouting pattern of faces and voices.	a stupidly well-dressed person

dispensed from immense bowls, and the whole downstairs became a delirious, circulating, shouting pattern of faces and voices.	In his own crowd Amory saw men kept out for wearing green hats, for being “a damn tailor’s dummy,” for having “too much pull in heaven,” for getting drunk one night “not like a gentleman, by God,” or for unfathomable secret reasons known to no one but the wielders of the black balls. This orgy of sociability culminated in a gigantic party at the Nassau Inn, where punch was dispensed from immense bowls, and the whole downstairs became a delirious, circulating, shouting pattern of faces and voices. “Hi, Dibby—’gratulations!”	served from huge bowls, and the entire downstairs area turned into a crazy, moving, loud mix of people.

the Nassau Inn	In his own crowd Amory saw men kept out for wearing green hats, for being “a damn tailor’s dummy,” for having “too much pull in heaven,” for getting drunk one night “not like a gentleman, by God,” or for unfathomable secret reasons known to no one but the wielders of the black balls. This orgy of sociability culminated in a gigantic party at the Nassau Inn, where punch was dispensed from immense bowls, and the whole downstairs became a delirious, circulating, shouting pattern of faces and voices. “Hi, Dibby—’gratulations!”	the Nassau Inn

a gigantic party	In his own crowd Amory saw men kept out for wearing green hats, for being “a damn tailor’s dummy,” for having “too much pull in heaven,” for getting drunk one night “not like a gentleman, by God,” or for unfathomable secret reasons known to no one but the wielders of the black balls. This orgy of sociability culminated in a gigantic party at the Nassau Inn, where punch was dispensed from immense bowls, and the whole downstairs became a delirious, circulating, shouting pattern of faces and voices. “Hi, Dibby—’gratulations!”	a huge party

immense bowls	In his own crowd Amory saw men kept out for wearing green hats, for being “a damn tailor’s dummy,” for having “too much pull in heaven,” for getting drunk one night “not like a gentleman, by God,” or for unfathomable secret reasons known to no one but the wielders of the black balls. This orgy of sociability culminated in a gigantic party at the Nassau Inn, where punch was dispensed from immense bowls, and the whole downstairs became a delirious, circulating, shouting pattern of faces and voices. “Hi, Dibby—’gratulations!”	huge bowls

a delirious, circulating, shouting pattern	In his own crowd Amory saw men kept out for wearing green hats, for being “a damn tailor’s dummy,” for having “too much pull in heaven,” for getting drunk one night “not like a gentleman, by God,” or for unfathomable secret reasons known to no one but the wielders of the black balls. This orgy of sociability culminated in a gigantic party at the Nassau Inn, where punch was dispensed from immense bowls, and the whole downstairs became a delirious, circulating, shouting pattern of faces and voices. “Hi, Dibby—’gratulations!”	a crazy, moving, noisy scene

“Goo’ boy	“Hi, Dibby—’gratulations!” “Goo’ boy, Tom, you got a good bunch in Cap.” “Say, Kerry—” “Oh, Kerry—I hear you went Tiger with all the weightlifters!”	Good boy

all the weightlifters	“Goo’ boy, Tom, you got a good bunch in Cap.” “Say, Kerry—” “Oh, Kerry—I hear you went Tiger with all the weightlifters!” “Well, I didn’t go Cottage—the parlor-snakes’ delight.”	all the weightlifters

went Tiger with all the weightlifters!”	“Goo’ boy, Tom, you got a good bunch in Cap.” “Say, Kerry—” “Oh, Kerry—I hear you went Tiger with all the weightlifters!” “Well, I didn’t go Cottage—the parlor-snakes’ delight.”	went wild/crazy with all the weightlifters!

the parlor-snakes’ delight	“Say, Kerry—” “Oh, Kerry—I hear you went Tiger with all the weightlifters!” “Well, I didn’t go Cottage—the parlor-snakes’ delight.” “They say Overton fainted when he got his Ivy bid—Did he sign up the first day?—oh, no.	what gay men enjoy

Cottage—the parlor-snakes’ delight.”	“Say, Kerry—” “Oh, Kerry—I hear you went Tiger with all the weightlifters!” “Well, I didn’t go Cottage—the parlor-snakes’ delight.” “They say Overton fainted when he got his Ivy bid—Did he sign up the first day?—oh, no.	Cottage—a place for gay men.

day?—oh, no.	“Well, I didn’t go Cottage—the parlor-snakes’ delight.” “They say Overton fainted when he got his Ivy bid—Did he sign up the first day?—oh, no. Tore over to Murray-Dodge on a bicycle—afraid it was a mistake.”	Day? Oh, no.

the first day?—oh	“Well, I didn’t go Cottage—the parlor-snakes’ delight.” “They say Overton fainted when he got his Ivy bid—Did he sign up the first day?—oh, no. Tore over to Murray-Dodge on a bicycle—afraid it was a mistake.”	The first day?

his Ivy bid	“Well, I didn’t go Cottage—the parlor-snakes’ delight.” “They say Overton fainted when he got his Ivy bid—Did he sign up the first day?—oh, no. Tore over to Murray-Dodge on a bicycle—afraid it was a mistake.”	acceptance to the Ivy Club

Tore over to Murray-Dodge on a bicycle—afraid it was a mistake.”	“They say Overton fainted when he got his Ivy bid—Did he sign up the first day?—oh, no. Tore over to Murray-Dodge on a bicycle—afraid it was a mistake.” “How’d you get into Cap—you old roué?”	Raced to Murray-Dodge on a bike because he thought it was an error.

get into Cap—you old roué?”	Tore over to Murray-Dodge on a bicycle—afraid it was a mistake.” “How’d you get into Cap—you old roué?” “ ’Gratulations!”	How did you get into Cap, you old flirt?

Gratulations yourself.	“ ’Gratulations!” “ ’Gratulations yourself. Hear you got a good crowd.”	Congrats to you too.

the snow-clad campus	Hear you got a good crowd.” When the bar closed, the party broke up into groups and streamed, singing, over the snow-clad campus, in a weird delusion that snobbishness and strain were over at last, and that they could do what they pleased for the next two years. Long afterward Amory thought of sophomore spring as the happiest time of his life.	the snow-covered campus

a weird delusion	Hear you got a good crowd.” When the bar closed, the party broke up into groups and streamed, singing, over the snow-clad campus, in a weird delusion that snobbishness and strain were over at last, and that they could do what they pleased for the next two years. Long afterward Amory thought of sophomore spring as the happiest time of his life.	a strange feeling

pleased for the next two years.	Hear you got a good crowd.” When the bar closed, the party broke up into groups and streamed, singing, over the snow-clad campus, in a weird delusion that snobbishness and strain were over at last, and that they could do what they pleased for the next two years. Long afterward Amory thought of sophomore spring as the happiest time of his life.	happy for the next two years.

sophomore spring	When the bar closed, the party broke up into groups and streamed, singing, over the snow-clad campus, in a weird delusion that snobbishness and strain were over at last, and that they could do what they pleased for the next two years. Long afterward Amory thought of sophomore spring as the happiest time of his life. His ideas were in tune with life as he found it; he wanted no more than to drift and dream and enjoy a dozen newfound friendships through the April afternoons.	The spring of his second year of college

a dozen newfound friendships	Long afterward Amory thought of sophomore spring as the happiest time of his life. His ideas were in tune with life as he found it; he wanted no more than to drift and dream and enjoy a dozen newfound friendships through the April afternoons. Alec Connage came into his room one morning and woke him up into the sunshine and peculiar glory of Campbell Hall shining in the window.	a dozen new friends

enjoy a dozen newfound friendships through the April afternoons.	Long afterward Amory thought of sophomore spring as the happiest time of his life. His ideas were in tune with life as he found it; he wanted no more than to drift and dream and enjoy a dozen newfound friendships through the April afternoons. Alec Connage came into his room one morning and woke him up into the sunshine and peculiar glory of Campbell Hall shining in the window.	enjoy new friendships during the April afternoons.

sunshine and peculiar glory of Campbell Hall shining in the window.	His ideas were in tune with life as he found it; he wanted no more than to drift and dream and enjoy a dozen newfound friendships through the April afternoons. Alec Connage came into his room one morning and woke him up into the sunshine and peculiar glory of Campbell Hall shining in the window. “Wake up, Original Sin, and scrape yourself together.	sunshine made Campbell Hall look beautiful shining through the window.

peculiar glory	His ideas were in tune with life as he found it; he wanted no more than to drift and dream and enjoy a dozen newfound friendships through the April afternoons. Alec Connage came into his room one morning and woke him up into the sunshine and peculiar glory of Campbell Hall shining in the window. “Wake up, Original Sin, and scrape yourself together.	strange beauty

front of Renwick’s in half an hour.	“Wake up, Original Sin, and scrape yourself together. Be in front of Renwick’s in half an hour. Somebody’s got a car.”	Be at Renwick's in half an hour.

load of small articles, upon the bed.	Somebody’s got a car.” He took the bureau cover and carefully deposited it, with its load of small articles, upon the bed. “Where’d you get the car?” demanded Amory cynically.	small things, on the bed.

a critical goopher	“Where’d you get the car?” demanded Amory cynically. “Sacred trust, but don’t be a critical goopher or you can’t go!” “I think I’ll sleep,” Amory said calmly, resettling himself and reaching beside the bed for a cigarette.	a spoilsport

reaching beside the bed for a cigarette.	“Sacred trust, but don’t be a critical goopher or you can’t go!” “I think I’ll sleep,” Amory said calmly, resettling himself and reaching beside the bed for a cigarette. “Sleep!”	reaching for a cigarette next to the bed.

“You damned gloom	I’ve got a class at eleven-thirty.” “You damned gloom! Of course, if you don’t want to go to the coast—” With a bound Amory was out of bed, scattering the bureau cover’s burden on the floor.	You gloomy jerk!

the bureau cover’s burden	“You damned gloom! Of course, if you don’t want to go to the coast—” With a bound Amory was out of bed, scattering the bureau cover’s burden on the floor. The coast.	what was on top of the dresser

a bound Amory	“You damned gloom! Of course, if you don’t want to go to the coast—” With a bound Amory was out of bed, scattering the bureau cover’s burden on the floor. The coast.	Amory jumped

was out of bed, scattering the bureau cover’s burden on the floor.	“You damned gloom! Of course, if you don’t want to go to the coast—” With a bound Amory was out of bed, scattering the bureau cover’s burden on the floor. The coast.	got out of bed, knocking everything off the bureau cover onto the floor.

were on their pilgrimage.	The coast. he hadn’t seen it for years, since he and his mother were on their pilgrimage. “Who’s going?”	were on their pilgrimage.

demanded as he wriggled into his B.V.D.s.	“Who’s going?” he demanded as he wriggled into his B.V.D.s. “Oh, Dick Humbird and Kerry Holiday and Jesse Ferrenby	demanded as he put on his underwear.

“Oh, Dick Humbird	he demanded as he wriggled into his B.V.D.s. “Oh, Dick Humbird and Kerry Holiday and Jesse Ferrenby and	“Oh, Dick Humbird

devouring cornflakes in Renwick’s, and at nine-thirty they bowled happily out of town, headed for the sands of Deal Beach.	Speed it up, kid!” In ten minutes Amory was devouring cornflakes in Renwick’s, and at nine-thirty they bowled happily out of town, headed for the sands of Deal Beach. “You see,” said Kerry, “the car belongs down there.	eating cornflakes quickly at Renwick's, and by 9:30 they drove out of town, excited to go to Deal Beach.

stolen from Asbury Park by persons unknown, who deserted it in Princeton and left for the West.	“You see,” said Kerry, “the car belongs down there. In fact, it was stolen from Asbury Park by persons unknown, who deserted it in Princeton and left for the West. Heartless Humbird here got permission from the city council to deliver it.”	stolen from Asbury Park by unknown people, who abandoned it in Princeton and headed West.

suggested Ferrenby, turning around from the front seat.	Heartless Humbird here got permission from the city council to deliver it.” “Anybody got any money?” suggested Ferrenby, turning around from the front seat. There was an emphatic negative chorus.	Ferrenby said, turning from the front seat.

an emphatic negative chorus	“Anybody got any money?” suggested Ferrenby, turning around from the front seat. There was an emphatic negative chorus. “That makes it interesting.”	Everyone strongly said no.

ability for three short days?	“How’re we going to get food?” asked Amory. “Honestly,” answered Kerry, eying him reprovingly, “do you doubt Kerry’s ability for three short days? Some people have lived on nothing for years at a time.	ability to get food for three days?

Kerry’s ability	“How’re we going to get food?” asked Amory. “Honestly,” answered Kerry, eying him reprovingly, “do you doubt Kerry’s ability for three short days? Some people have lived on nothing for years at a time.	Kerry's skills

One of the days is the Sabbath.”	“Three days,” Amory mused, “and I’ve got classes.” “One of the days is the Sabbath.” “Just the same, I can only cut six more classes, with over a month and a half to go.”	One of the days is Sunday.

cut six more classes, with over a month and a half to go.”	“One of the days is the Sabbath.” “Just the same, I can only cut six more classes, with over a month and a half to go.” “Throw him out!”	I can only miss six more classes, and there's still a month and a half left.

get some dope on yourself, Amory?”	“Amory, you’re running it out, if I may coin a new phrase.” “Hadn’t you better get some dope on yourself, Amory?” Amory subsided resignedly and drooped into a contemplation of the scenery.	Amory, shouldn't you find out something about yourself?

contemplation of the scenery.	“Hadn’t you better get some dope on yourself, Amory?” Amory subsided resignedly and drooped into a contemplation of the scenery. Swinburne seemed to fit in somehow.	Looking at the scenery.

night that wins; And time remembered is grief forgotten, And frosts are slain and flowers begotten, And in green underwood and cover, Blossom by blossom the spring begins.	Swinburne seemed to fit in somehow. “Oh, winter’s rains and ruins are over, And all the seasons of snows and sins; The days dividing lover and lover, The light that loses, the night that wins; And time remembered is grief forgotten, And frosts are slain and flowers begotten, And in green underwood and cover, Blossom by blossom the spring begins. “The full streams feed on flower of—” “What’s the matter, Amory?	night triumphs; And remembering the past no longer brings pain, And the cold is defeated and flowers are born, And hidden in the green undergrowth, The spring starts with each new blossom.

green underwood	Swinburne seemed to fit in somehow. “Oh, winter’s rains and ruins are over, And all the seasons of snows and sins; The days dividing lover and lover, The light that loses, the night that wins; And time remembered is grief forgotten, And frosts are slain and flowers begotten, And in green underwood and cover, Blossom by blossom the spring begins. “The full streams feed on flower of—” “What’s the matter, Amory?	green bushes

winter’s rains	Swinburne seemed to fit in somehow. “Oh, winter’s rains and ruins are over, And all the seasons of snows and sins; The days dividing lover and lover, The light that loses, the night that wins; And time remembered is grief forgotten, And frosts are slain and flowers begotten, And in green underwood and cover, Blossom by blossom the spring begins. “The full streams feed on flower of—” “What’s the matter, Amory?	winter rains

feed on flower of—” “What’s the matter, Amory?	“Oh, winter’s rains and ruins are over, And all the seasons of snows and sins; The days dividing lover and lover, The light that loses, the night that wins; And time remembered is grief forgotten, And frosts are slain and flowers begotten, And in green underwood and cover, Blossom by blossom the spring begins. “The full streams feed on flower of—” “What’s the matter, Amory? Amory’s thinking about poetry, about the pretty birds and flowers.	feed on flower of--” “What’s wrong, Amory?

thinking about the Princetonian.	“No, I’m not,” he lied. “I’m thinking about the Princetonian. I ought to make up tonight; but I can telephone back, I suppose.”	Thinking about the school newspaper.

a defeated competitor	I ought to make up tonight; but I can telephone back, I suppose.” “Oh,” said Kerry respectfully, “these important men—” Amory flushed and it seemed to him that Ferrenby, a defeated competitor, winced a little. Of course, Kerry was only kidding, but he really mustn’t mention the Princetonian.	someone who lost

Ferrenby, a defeated competitor, winced a little.	I ought to make up tonight; but I can telephone back, I suppose.” “Oh,” said Kerry respectfully, “these important men—” Amory flushed and it seemed to him that Ferrenby, a defeated competitor, winced a little. Of course, Kerry was only kidding, but he really mustn’t mention the Princetonian.	Ferrenby, who had lost out, flinched slightly.

neared the shore and the salt breezes scurried by, he began to picture the ocean and long, level stretches of sand and red roofs over blue sea.	Of course, Kerry was only kidding, but he really mustn’t mention the Princetonian. It was a halcyon day, and as they neared the shore and the salt breezes scurried by, he began to picture the ocean and long, level stretches of sand and red roofs over blue sea. Then they hurried through the little town and it all flashed upon his consciousness to a mighty paean of emotion.	got closer to the beach and the salty wind blew past, he started imagining the ocean, long sandy beaches, and red roofs overlooking the blue sea.

a halcyon day	Of course, Kerry was only kidding, but he really mustn’t mention the Princetonian. It was a halcyon day, and as they neared the shore and the salt breezes scurried by, he began to picture the ocean and long, level stretches of sand and red roofs over blue sea. Then they hurried through the little town and it all flashed upon his consciousness to a mighty paean of emotion.	a peaceful day

the salt breezes	Of course, Kerry was only kidding, but he really mustn’t mention the Princetonian. It was a halcyon day, and as they neared the shore and the salt breezes scurried by, he began to picture the ocean and long, level stretches of sand and red roofs over blue sea. Then they hurried through the little town and it all flashed upon his consciousness to a mighty paean of emotion.	the salty wind

paean of emotion.	It was a halcyon day, and as they neared the shore and the salt breezes scurried by, he began to picture the ocean and long, level stretches of sand and red roofs over blue sea. Then they hurried through the little town and it all flashed upon his consciousness to a mighty paean of emotion. “Oh, good Lord!	an overwhelming burst of feeling.

a mighty paean	It was a halcyon day, and as they neared the shore and the salt breezes scurried by, he began to picture the ocean and long, level stretches of sand and red roofs over blue sea. Then they hurried through the little town and it all flashed upon his consciousness to a mighty paean of emotion. “Oh, good Lord!	a powerful burst of feeling

Oh, gentlefolk	“Let me out, quick—I haven’t seen it for eight years! Oh, gentlefolk, stop the car!” “What an odd child!” remarked Alec.	Oh, good people

drawn up at a curb, and Amory ran for the boardwalk.	“I do believe he’s a bit eccentric.” The car was obligingly drawn up at a curb, and Amory ran for the boardwalk. First, he realized that the sea was blue and that there was an enormous quantity of it, and that it roared and roared—really all the banalities about the ocean that one could realize, but if anyone had told him then that these things were banalities, he would have gaped in wonder.	pulled up to the curb, and Amory ran toward the boardwalk.

all the banalities	The car was obligingly drawn up at a curb, and Amory ran for the boardwalk. First, he realized that the sea was blue and that there was an enormous quantity of it, and that it roared and roared—really all the banalities about the ocean that one could realize, but if anyone had told him then that these things were banalities, he would have gaped in wonder. “Now we’ll get lunch,” ordered Kerry, wandering up with the crowd.	all the obvious things

banalities about the ocean that one could realize, but if anyone had told him then that these things were banalities, he would have gaped in wonder.	The car was obligingly drawn up at a curb, and Amory ran for the boardwalk. First, he realized that the sea was blue and that there was an enormous quantity of it, and that it roared and roared—really all the banalities about the ocean that one could realize, but if anyone had told him then that these things were banalities, he would have gaped in wonder. “Now we’ll get lunch,” ordered Kerry, wandering up with the crowd.	obvious things about the ocean that anyone could notice, but if someone had told him they were obvious, he would have been amazed.

wandering up with the crowd.	First, he realized that the sea was blue and that there was an enormous quantity of it, and that it roared and roared—really all the banalities about the ocean that one could realize, but if anyone had told him then that these things were banalities, he would have gaped in wonder. “Now we’ll get lunch,” ordered Kerry, wandering up with the crowd. “Come on, Amory, tear yourself away and get practical.”	walking up with the crowd.

the most imposing hostelry	“We’ll try the best hotel first,” he went on, “and thence and so forth.” They strolled along the boardwalk to the most imposing hostelry in sight, and, entering the dining-room, scattered about a table. “Eight Bronxes,” commanded Alec, “and a club sandwich and Juliennes.	the fanciest hotel

scattered about a table.	“We’ll try the best hotel first,” he went on, “and thence and so forth.” They strolled along the boardwalk to the most imposing hostelry in sight, and, entering the dining-room, scattered about a table. “Eight Bronxes,” commanded Alec, “and a club sandwich and Juliennes.	spread out around a table.

chair where he could watch the sea and feel the rock of it.	Hand the rest around.” Amory ate little, having seized a chair where he could watch the sea and feel the rock of it. When luncheon was over they sat and smoked quietly.	chair where he could watch the sea and feel the rocking.

sat and smoked quietly.	Amory ate little, having seized a chair where he could watch the sea and feel the rock of it. When luncheon was over they sat and smoked quietly. “What’s the bill?”	Sat and smoked in silence.

“Rotten overcharge	“Eight twenty-five.” “Rotten overcharge. We’ll give them two dollars and one for the waiter.	unfair overcharge

one for the waiter.	“Rotten overcharge. We’ll give them two dollars and one for the waiter. Kerry, collect the small change.”	One dollar for the waiter.

tossed two dollars on the check, and turned away.	Kerry, collect the small change.” The waiter approached, and Kerry gravely handed him a dollar, tossed two dollars on the check, and turned away. They sauntered leisurely toward the door, pursued in a moment by the suspicious Ganymede.	put two dollars on the bill, and left.

sauntered leisurely toward the door, pursued in a moment by the suspicious Ganymede.	The waiter approached, and Kerry gravely handed him a dollar, tossed two dollars on the check, and turned away. They sauntered leisurely toward the door, pursued in a moment by the suspicious Ganymede. “Some mistake, sir.”	walked slowly toward the door, followed quickly by the suspicious waiter.

the suspicious Ganymede	The waiter approached, and Kerry gravely handed him a dollar, tossed two dollars on the check, and turned away. They sauntered leisurely toward the door, pursued in a moment by the suspicious Ganymede. “Some mistake, sir.”	the suspicious waiter

stood motionless and expressionless while they walked out.	“No mistake!” he said, shaking his head gravely, and, tearing it into four pieces, he handed the scraps to the waiter, who was so dumbfounded that he stood motionless and expressionless while they walked out. “Won’t he send after us?”	He stood still and blank-faced as they left.

the proprietor’s sons	“Won’t he send after us?” “No,” said Kerry; “for a minute he’ll think we’re the proprietor’s sons or something; then he’ll look at the check again and call the manager, and in the meantime—” They left the car at Asbury and streetcar’d to Allenhurst, where they investigated the crowded pavilions for beauty. At four there were refreshments in a lunchroom, and this time they paid an even smaller percent on the total cost; something about the appearance and savoir-faire of the crowd made the thing go, and they were not pursued.	the owner's sons

the crowded pavilions	“Won’t he send after us?” “No,” said Kerry; “for a minute he’ll think we’re the proprietor’s sons or something; then he’ll look at the check again and call the manager, and in the meantime—” They left the car at Asbury and streetcar’d to Allenhurst, where they investigated the crowded pavilions for beauty. At four there were refreshments in a lunchroom, and this time they paid an even smaller percent on the total cost; something about the appearance and savoir-faire of the crowd made the thing go, and they were not pursued.	the crowded areas

Allenhurst, where they investigated the crowded pavilions for beauty.	“Won’t he send after us?” “No,” said Kerry; “for a minute he’ll think we’re the proprietor’s sons or something; then he’ll look at the check again and call the manager, and in the meantime—” They left the car at Asbury and streetcar’d to Allenhurst, where they investigated the crowded pavilions for beauty. At four there were refreshments in a lunchroom, and this time they paid an even smaller percent on the total cost; something about the appearance and savoir-faire of the crowd made the thing go, and they were not pursued.	Allenhurst, where they looked for beautiful people in the crowded areas.

time they paid an even smaller percent on the total cost; something about the appearance and savoir-faire of the crowd made the thing go, and they were not pursued.	“No,” said Kerry; “for a minute he’ll think we’re the proprietor’s sons or something; then he’ll look at the check again and call the manager, and in the meantime—” They left the car at Asbury and streetcar’d to Allenhurst, where they investigated the crowded pavilions for beauty. At four there were refreshments in a lunchroom, and this time they paid an even smaller percent on the total cost; something about the appearance and savoir-faire of the crowd made the thing go, and they were not pursued. “You see, Amory, we’re Marxian Socialists,” explained Kerry.	they paid even less of the bill; the crowd's look and sophistication helped them get away with it, and no one chased after them.

Marxian Socialists	At four there were refreshments in a lunchroom, and this time they paid an even smaller percent on the total cost; something about the appearance and savoir-faire of the crowd made the thing go, and they were not pursued. “You see, Amory, we’re Marxian Socialists,” explained Kerry. “We don’t believe in property and we’re putting it to the great test.”	Marxist Socialists

strolled up and down the boardwalk in a row, chanting a monotonous ditty about the sad sea waves.	“Watch, and put your trust in Holiday.” They became jovial about five-thirty and, linking arms, strolled up and down the boardwalk in a row, chanting a monotonous ditty about the sad sea waves. Then Kerry saw a face in the crowd that attracted him and, rushing off, reappeared in a moment with one of the homeliest girls Amory had ever set eyes on.	walked back and forth on the boardwalk together, singing a boring song about the sad ocean waves.

a monotonous ditty	“Watch, and put your trust in Holiday.” They became jovial about five-thirty and, linking arms, strolled up and down the boardwalk in a row, chanting a monotonous ditty about the sad sea waves. Then Kerry saw a face in the crowd that attracted him and, rushing off, reappeared in a moment with one of the homeliest girls Amory had ever set eyes on.	a boring song

the homeliest girls	They became jovial about five-thirty and, linking arms, strolled up and down the boardwalk in a row, chanting a monotonous ditty about the sad sea waves. Then Kerry saw a face in the crowd that attracted him and, rushing off, reappeared in a moment with one of the homeliest girls Amory had ever set eyes on. Her pale mouth extended from ear to ear, her teeth projected in a solid wedge, and she had little, squinty eyes that peeped ingratiatingly over the side sweep of her nose.	the least attractive girls

one of the homeliest girls Amory had ever set eyes on.	They became jovial about five-thirty and, linking arms, strolled up and down the boardwalk in a row, chanting a monotonous ditty about the sad sea waves. Then Kerry saw a face in the crowd that attracted him and, rushing off, reappeared in a moment with one of the homeliest girls Amory had ever set eyes on. Her pale mouth extended from ear to ear, her teeth projected in a solid wedge, and she had little, squinty eyes that peeped ingratiatingly over the side sweep of her nose.	one of the ugliest girls Amory had ever seen.

little, squinty eyes	Then Kerry saw a face in the crowd that attracted him and, rushing off, reappeared in a moment with one of the homeliest girls Amory had ever set eyes on. Her pale mouth extended from ear to ear, her teeth projected in a solid wedge, and she had little, squinty eyes that peeped ingratiatingly over the side sweep of her nose. Kerry presented them formally.	small, narrowed eyes

the side sweep	Then Kerry saw a face in the crowd that attracted him and, rushing off, reappeared in a moment with one of the homeliest girls Amory had ever set eyes on. Her pale mouth extended from ear to ear, her teeth projected in a solid wedge, and she had little, squinty eyes that peeped ingratiatingly over the side sweep of her nose. Kerry presented them formally.	the curve of her nose

a solid wedge	Then Kerry saw a face in the crowd that attracted him and, rushing off, reappeared in a moment with one of the homeliest girls Amory had ever set eyes on. Her pale mouth extended from ear to ear, her teeth projected in a solid wedge, and she had little, squinty eyes that peeped ingratiatingly over the side sweep of her nose. Kerry presented them formally.	a blocky shape

sweep of her nose.	Then Kerry saw a face in the crowd that attracted him and, rushing off, reappeared in a moment with one of the homeliest girls Amory had ever set eyes on. Her pale mouth extended from ear to ear, her teeth projected in a solid wedge, and she had little, squinty eyes that peeped ingratiatingly over the side sweep of her nose. Kerry presented them formally.	the curve of her nose.

Name of Kaluka, Hawaiian queen!	Kerry presented them formally. “Name of Kaluka, Hawaiian queen! Let me present Messrs. Connage, Sloane, Humbird, Ferrenby, and Blaine.”	In the name of Queen Kaluka of Hawaii!

noticed in her life—possibly she was half-witted.	The girl bobbed courtesies all around. Poor creature; Amory supposed she had never before been noticed in her life—possibly she was half-witted. While she accompanied them (Kerry had invited her to supper) she said nothing which could discountenance such a belief.	been noticed before, maybe she was simple.

nothing which could discountenance such a belief.	Poor creature; Amory supposed she had never before been noticed in her life—possibly she was half-witted. While she accompanied them (Kerry had invited her to supper) she said nothing which could discountenance such a belief. “She prefers her native dishes,” said Alec gravely to the waiter, “but any coarse food will do.”	nothing that would disprove that idea.

any coarse food	While she accompanied them (Kerry had invited her to supper) she said nothing which could discountenance such a belief. “She prefers her native dishes,” said Alec gravely to the waiter, “but any coarse food will do.” All through supper he addressed her in the most respectful language, while Kerry made idiotic love to her on the other side, and she giggled and grinned.	any simple food

said Alec gravely to the waiter, “but any coarse food will do.”	While she accompanied them (Kerry had invited her to supper) she said nothing which could discountenance such a belief. “She prefers her native dishes,” said Alec gravely to the waiter, “but any coarse food will do.” All through supper he addressed her in the most respectful language, while Kerry made idiotic love to her on the other side, and she giggled and grinned.	Alec said seriously to the waiter, "but anything plain will be fine."

the most respectful language	“She prefers her native dishes,” said Alec gravely to the waiter, “but any coarse food will do.” All through supper he addressed her in the most respectful language, while Kerry made idiotic love to her on the other side, and she giggled and grinned. Amory was content to sit and watch the byplay, thinking what a light touch Kerry had, and how he could transform the barest incident into a thing of curve and contour.	very polite language

made idiotic love to her on the other side, and she giggled and grinned.	“She prefers her native dishes,” said Alec gravely to the waiter, “but any coarse food will do.” All through supper he addressed her in the most respectful language, while Kerry made idiotic love to her on the other side, and she giggled and grinned. Amory was content to sit and watch the byplay, thinking what a light touch Kerry had, and how he could transform the barest incident into a thing of curve and contour.	was foolishly flirting with her nearby, and she giggled and grinned.

idiotic love	“She prefers her native dishes,” said Alec gravely to the waiter, “but any coarse food will do.” All through supper he addressed her in the most respectful language, while Kerry made idiotic love to her on the other side, and she giggled and grinned. Amory was content to sit and watch the byplay, thinking what a light touch Kerry had, and how he could transform the barest incident into a thing of curve and contour.	foolish flirting

thing of curve and contour.	All through supper he addressed her in the most respectful language, while Kerry made idiotic love to her on the other side, and she giggled and grinned. Amory was content to sit and watch the byplay, thinking what a light touch Kerry had, and how he could transform the barest incident into a thing of curve and contour. They all seemed to have the spirit of it more or less, and it was a relaxation to be with them.	something interesting and well-shaped.

spirit of it more or less, and it was a relaxation to be with them.	Amory was content to sit and watch the byplay, thinking what a light touch Kerry had, and how he could transform the barest incident into a thing of curve and contour. They all seemed to have the spirit of it more or less, and it was a relaxation to be with them. Amory usually liked men individually, yet feared them in crowds unless the crowd was around him.	They mostly understood each other, and it was relaxing to be around them.

feared them in crowds unless the crowd was around him.	They all seemed to have the spirit of it more or less, and it was a relaxation to be with them. Amory usually liked men individually, yet feared them in crowds unless the crowd was around him. He wondered how much each one contributed to the party, for there was somewhat of a spiritual tax levied.	was afraid of them in groups unless he was the center of attention.

was somewhat of a spiritual tax levied.	Amory usually liked men individually, yet feared them in crowds unless the crowd was around him. He wondered how much each one contributed to the party, for there was somewhat of a spiritual tax levied. Alec and Kerry were the life of it, but not quite the centre.	there was a hidden cost to the party.

his impatient superciliousness	Alec and Kerry were the life of it, but not quite the centre. Somehow the quiet Humbird, and Sloane, with his impatient superciliousness, were the centre. Dick Humbird had, ever since freshman year, seemed to Amory a perfect type of aristocrat.	his impatient arrogance

the quiet Humbird	Alec and Kerry were the life of it, but not quite the centre. Somehow the quiet Humbird, and Sloane, with his impatient superciliousness, were the centre. Dick Humbird had, ever since freshman year, seemed to Amory a perfect type of aristocrat.	Quiet Humbird

Humbird, and Sloane, with his impatient superciliousness, were the centre.	Alec and Kerry were the life of it, but not quite the centre. Somehow the quiet Humbird, and Sloane, with his impatient superciliousness, were the centre. Dick Humbird had, ever since freshman year, seemed to Amory a perfect type of aristocrat.	Humbird and Sloane, with his impatient arrogance, were the focus.

seemed to Amory a perfect type of aristocrat.	Somehow the quiet Humbird, and Sloane, with his impatient superciliousness, were the centre. Dick Humbird had, ever since freshman year, seemed to Amory a perfect type of aristocrat. He was slender but well-built—black curly hair, straight features, and rather a dark skin.	Amory thought he was the perfect example of an aristocrat.

freshman year	Somehow the quiet Humbird, and Sloane, with his impatient superciliousness, were the centre. Dick Humbird had, ever since freshman year, seemed to Amory a perfect type of aristocrat. He was slender but well-built—black curly hair, straight features, and rather a dark skin.	first year of college

slender but well-built—black curly hair	Dick Humbird had, ever since freshman year, seemed to Amory a perfect type of aristocrat. He was slender but well-built—black curly hair, straight features, and rather a dark skin. Everything he said sounded intangibly appropriate.	slim but strong, with curly black hair

Everything he said sounded intangibly appropriate.	He was slender but well-built—black curly hair, straight features, and rather a dark skin. Everything he said sounded intangibly appropriate. He possessed infinite courage, an averagely good mind, and a sense of honor with a clear charm and noblesse oblige that varied it from righteousness.	What he said always felt right in a way that was hard to define.

an averagely good mind	Everything he said sounded intangibly appropriate. He possessed infinite courage, an averagely good mind, and a sense of honor with a clear charm and noblesse oblige that varied it from righteousness. He could dissipate without going to pieces, and even his most bohemian adventures never seemed “running it out.”	a pretty good mind

sense of honor with a clear charm and noblesse oblige that varied it from righteousness.	Everything he said sounded intangibly appropriate. He possessed infinite courage, an averagely good mind, and a sense of honor with a clear charm and noblesse oblige that varied it from righteousness. He could dissipate without going to pieces, and even his most bohemian adventures never seemed “running it out.”	He had a charming sense of honor and duty that kept him from being self-righteous.

dissipate without going to pieces, and even his most bohemian adventures never seemed “running it out.”	He possessed infinite courage, an averagely good mind, and a sense of honor with a clear charm and noblesse oblige that varied it from righteousness. He could dissipate without going to pieces, and even his most bohemian adventures never seemed “running it out.” People dressed like him, tried to talk as he did.	He could party hard without falling apart, and even his wildest adventures never seemed like he was wasting his life.

even his most bohemian adventures	He possessed infinite courage, an averagely good mind, and a sense of honor with a clear charm and noblesse oblige that varied it from righteousness. He could dissipate without going to pieces, and even his most bohemian adventures never seemed “running it out.” People dressed like him, tried to talk as he did.	even his wildest adventures

type that was essentially middle class—he never seemed to perspire.	Amory decided that he probably held the world back, but he wouldn’t have changed him. He differed from the healthy type that was essentially middle class—he never seemed to perspire. Some people couldn’t be familiar with a chauffeur without having it returned; Humbird could have lunched at Sherry’s with a colored man, yet people would have somehow known that it was all right.	the typical middle-class person—he never seemed to worry.

familiar with a chauffeur without having it returned; Humbird could have lunched at Sherry’s with a colored man, yet people would have somehow known that it was all right.	He differed from the healthy type that was essentially middle class—he never seemed to perspire. Some people couldn’t be familiar with a chauffeur without having it returned; Humbird could have lunched at Sherry’s with a colored man, yet people would have somehow known that it was all right. He was not a snob, though he knew only half his class.	able to be friendly with a chauffeur without the chauffeur presuming; Humbird could have had lunch at a fancy restaurant with a Black man, and people would have somehow known it was acceptable.

highest to the lowest, but it was impossible to “cultivate” him.	He was not a snob, though he knew only half his class. His friends ranged from the highest to the lowest, but it was impossible to “cultivate” him. Servants worshipped him, and treated him like a god.	from the richest to the poorest, but you couldn't impress or manipulate him.

example of what the upper class tries to be.	Servants worshipped him, and treated him like a god. He seemed the eternal example of what the upper class tries to be. “He’s like those pictures in the Illustrated London News of the English officers who have been killed,” Amory had said to Alec.	what the upper class aspires to be.

’s like those pictures in the Illustrated London News of the English officers who have been killed,” Amory had said to Alec.	He seemed the eternal example of what the upper class tries to be. “He’s like those pictures in the Illustrated London News of the English officers who have been killed,” Amory had said to Alec. “Well,” Alec had answered, “if you want to know the shocking truth, his father was a grocery clerk who made a fortune in Tacoma real estate and came to New York ten years ago.”	He looks like the pictures in the Illustrated London News of dead English officers, Amory said to Alec.

was a grocery clerk who made a fortune in Tacoma real estate and came to New York ten years ago.”	“He’s like those pictures in the Illustrated London News of the English officers who have been killed,” Amory had said to Alec. “Well,” Alec had answered, “if you want to know the shocking truth, his father was a grocery clerk who made a fortune in Tacoma real estate and came to New York ten years ago.” Amory had felt a curious sinking sensation.	was a grocery clerk who made a fortune in Tacoma real estate and came to New York ten years ago.

Tacoma real estate	“He’s like those pictures in the Illustrated London News of the English officers who have been killed,” Amory had said to Alec. “Well,” Alec had answered, “if you want to know the shocking truth, his father was a grocery clerk who made a fortune in Tacoma real estate and came to New York ten years ago.” Amory had felt a curious sinking sensation.	Real estate in Tacoma

the shocking truth	“He’s like those pictures in the Illustrated London News of the English officers who have been killed,” Amory had said to Alec. “Well,” Alec had answered, “if you want to know the shocking truth, his father was a grocery clerk who made a fortune in Tacoma real estate and came to New York ten years ago.” Amory had felt a curious sinking sensation.	the awful truth

a curious sinking sensation	“Well,” Alec had answered, “if you want to know the shocking truth, his father was a grocery clerk who made a fortune in Tacoma real estate and came to New York ten years ago.” Amory had felt a curious sinking sensation. This present type of party was made possible by the surging together of the class after club elections—as if to make a last desperate attempt to know itself, to keep together, to fight off the tightening spirit of the clubs.	a strange, let-down feeling

surging together of the class after club elections—as if to make a last desperate attempt to know itself, to keep together, to fight off the tightening spirit of the clubs.	Amory had felt a curious sinking sensation. This present type of party was made possible by the surging together of the class after club elections—as if to make a last desperate attempt to know itself, to keep together, to fight off the tightening spirit of the clubs. It was a letdown from the conventional heights they had all walked so rigidly.	the class gathering after club elections, as if in a final effort to understand themselves, stay united, and resist the growing influence of the clubs.

the tightening spirit	Amory had felt a curious sinking sensation. This present type of party was made possible by the surging together of the class after club elections—as if to make a last desperate attempt to know itself, to keep together, to fight off the tightening spirit of the clubs. It was a letdown from the conventional heights they had all walked so rigidly.	growing exclusivity

heights they had all walked so rigidly.	This present type of party was made possible by the surging together of the class after club elections—as if to make a last desperate attempt to know itself, to keep together, to fight off the tightening spirit of the clubs. It was a letdown from the conventional heights they had all walked so rigidly. After supper they saw Kaluka to the boardwalk, and then strolled back along the beach to Asbury.	the formal standards they had all followed so strictly.

saw Kaluka to the boardwalk, and then strolled back along the beach to Asbury.	It was a letdown from the conventional heights they had all walked so rigidly. After supper they saw Kaluka to the boardwalk, and then strolled back along the beach to Asbury. The evening sea was a new sensation, for all its color and mellow age was gone, and it seemed the bleak waste that made the Norse sagas sad; Amory thought of Kipling’s “Beaches of Lukanon before the sealers came.”	walked Kaluka to the boardwalk, and then walked back along the beach to Asbury.

all its color and mellow age	After supper they saw Kaluka to the boardwalk, and then strolled back along the beach to Asbury. The evening sea was a new sensation, for all its color and mellow age was gone, and it seemed the bleak waste that made the Norse sagas sad; Amory thought of Kipling’s “Beaches of Lukanon before the sealers came.” It was still a music, though, infinitely sorrowful.	all its bright colors and pleasant, old feeling

the bleak waste	After supper they saw Kaluka to the boardwalk, and then strolled back along the beach to Asbury. The evening sea was a new sensation, for all its color and mellow age was gone, and it seemed the bleak waste that made the Norse sagas sad; Amory thought of Kipling’s “Beaches of Lukanon before the sealers came.” It was still a music, though, infinitely sorrowful.	the desolate emptiness

a new sensation	After supper they saw Kaluka to the boardwalk, and then strolled back along the beach to Asbury. The evening sea was a new sensation, for all its color and mellow age was gone, and it seemed the bleak waste that made the Norse sagas sad; Amory thought of Kipling’s “Beaches of Lukanon before the sealers came.” It was still a music, though, infinitely sorrowful.	a different feeling

Kipling’s “Beaches	After supper they saw Kaluka to the boardwalk, and then strolled back along the beach to Asbury. The evening sea was a new sensation, for all its color and mellow age was gone, and it seemed the bleak waste that made the Norse sagas sad; Amory thought of Kipling’s “Beaches of Lukanon before the sealers came.” It was still a music, though, infinitely sorrowful.	Kipling’s “Beaches

thought of Kipling’s “Beaches of Lukanon before the sealers came.”	After supper they saw Kaluka to the boardwalk, and then strolled back along the beach to Asbury. The evening sea was a new sensation, for all its color and mellow age was gone, and it seemed the bleak waste that made the Norse sagas sad; Amory thought of Kipling’s “Beaches of Lukanon before the sealers came.” It was still a music, though, infinitely sorrowful.	remembered Kipling's poem "Beaches of Lukanon before the sealers came."

the Norse sagas	After supper they saw Kaluka to the boardwalk, and then strolled back along the beach to Asbury. The evening sea was a new sensation, for all its color and mellow age was gone, and it seemed the bleak waste that made the Norse sagas sad; Amory thought of Kipling’s “Beaches of Lukanon before the sealers came.” It was still a music, though, infinitely sorrowful.	the stories from old Scandinavia

Ten o’clock	It was still a music, though, infinitely sorrowful. Ten o’clock found them penniless. They had suppered greatly on their last eleven cents and, singing, strolled up through the casinos and lighted arches on the boardwalk, stopping to listen approvingly to all band concerts.	Ten o'clock

arches on the boardwalk, stopping to listen approvingly to all band concerts.	Ten o’clock found them penniless. They had suppered greatly on their last eleven cents and, singing, strolled up through the casinos and lighted arches on the boardwalk, stopping to listen approvingly to all band concerts. In one place Kerry took up a collection for the French War Orphans which netted a dollar and twenty cents, and with this they bought some brandy in case they caught cold in the night.	walkway, pausing to enjoy the band concerts.

collection for the French War Orphans which netted a dollar and twenty cents, and with this they bought some brandy in case they caught cold in the night.	They had suppered greatly on their last eleven cents and, singing, strolled up through the casinos and lighted arches on the boardwalk, stopping to listen approvingly to all band concerts. In one place Kerry took up a collection for the French War Orphans which netted a dollar and twenty cents, and with this they bought some brandy in case they caught cold in the night. They finished the day in a moving-picture show and went into solemn systematic roars of laughter at an ancient comedy, to the startled annoyance of the rest of the audience.	They collected a dollar and twenty cents for French war orphans, and used it to buy brandy in case they got sick during the night.

the French War Orphans	They had suppered greatly on their last eleven cents and, singing, strolled up through the casinos and lighted arches on the boardwalk, stopping to listen approvingly to all band concerts. In one place Kerry took up a collection for the French War Orphans which netted a dollar and twenty cents, and with this they bought some brandy in case they caught cold in the night. They finished the day in a moving-picture show and went into solemn systematic roars of laughter at an ancient comedy, to the startled annoyance of the rest of the audience.	French war orphans

the startled annoyance	In one place Kerry took up a collection for the French War Orphans which netted a dollar and twenty cents, and with this they bought some brandy in case they caught cold in the night. They finished the day in a moving-picture show and went into solemn systematic roars of laughter at an ancient comedy, to the startled annoyance of the rest of the audience. Their entrance was distinctly strategic, for each man as he entered pointed reproachfully at the one just behind him.	the surprise and irritation

solemn systematic roars	In one place Kerry took up a collection for the French War Orphans which netted a dollar and twenty cents, and with this they bought some brandy in case they caught cold in the night. They finished the day in a moving-picture show and went into solemn systematic roars of laughter at an ancient comedy, to the startled annoyance of the rest of the audience. Their entrance was distinctly strategic, for each man as he entered pointed reproachfully at the one just behind him.	loud, controlled laughter

annoyance of the rest of the audience.	In one place Kerry took up a collection for the French War Orphans which netted a dollar and twenty cents, and with this they bought some brandy in case they caught cold in the night. They finished the day in a moving-picture show and went into solemn systematic roars of laughter at an ancient comedy, to the startled annoyance of the rest of the audience. Their entrance was distinctly strategic, for each man as he entered pointed reproachfully at the one just behind him.	which bothered the rest of the audience.

was distinctly strategic, for each man as he entered pointed reproachfully at the one just behind him.	They finished the day in a moving-picture show and went into solemn systematic roars of laughter at an ancient comedy, to the startled annoyance of the rest of the audience. Their entrance was distinctly strategic, for each man as he entered pointed reproachfully at the one just behind him. Sloane, bringing up the rear, disclaimed all knowledge and responsibility as soon as the others were scattered inside; then as the irate ticket-taker rushed in he followed nonchalantly.	was clearly planned, with each man blaming the person behind them as they walked in.

the irate ticket-taker	Their entrance was distinctly strategic, for each man as he entered pointed reproachfully at the one just behind him. Sloane, bringing up the rear, disclaimed all knowledge and responsibility as soon as the others were scattered inside; then as the irate ticket-taker rushed in he followed nonchalantly. They reassembled later by the Casino and made arrangements for the night.	the angry ticket collector

followed nonchalantly.	Their entrance was distinctly strategic, for each man as he entered pointed reproachfully at the one just behind him. Sloane, bringing up the rear, disclaimed all knowledge and responsibility as soon as the others were scattered inside; then as the irate ticket-taker rushed in he followed nonchalantly. They reassembled later by the Casino and made arrangements for the night.	followed casually.

sleep on the platform and, having collected a huge pile of rugs from the booths to serve as mattresses and blankets, they talked until midnight, and then fell into a dreamless sleep, though Amory tried hard to stay awake and watch that marvellous moon settle on the sea.	They reassembled later by the Casino and made arrangements for the night. Kerry wormed permission from the watchman to sleep on the platform and, having collected a huge pile of rugs from the booths to serve as mattresses and blankets, they talked until midnight, and then fell into a dreamless sleep, though Amory tried hard to stay awake and watch that marvellous moon settle on the sea. So they progressed for two happy days, up and down the shore by streetcar or machine, or by shoe-leather on the crowded boardwalk; sometimes eating with the wealthy, more frequently dining frugally at the expense of an unsuspecting restaurateur.	sleep on the platform after getting permission from the watchman. They gathered a big pile of rugs from the booths to use as beds and blankets. They talked until midnight and then fell into a deep sleep, though Amory tried to stay awake and watch the beautiful moon sink into the sea.

a huge pile	They reassembled later by the Casino and made arrangements for the night. Kerry wormed permission from the watchman to sleep on the platform and, having collected a huge pile of rugs from the booths to serve as mattresses and blankets, they talked until midnight, and then fell into a dreamless sleep, though Amory tried hard to stay awake and watch that marvellous moon settle on the sea. So they progressed for two happy days, up and down the shore by streetcar or machine, or by shoe-leather on the crowded boardwalk; sometimes eating with the wealthy, more frequently dining frugally at the expense of an unsuspecting restaurateur.	a big pile

marvellous moon	They reassembled later by the Casino and made arrangements for the night. Kerry wormed permission from the watchman to sleep on the platform and, having collected a huge pile of rugs from the booths to serve as mattresses and blankets, they talked until midnight, and then fell into a dreamless sleep, though Amory tried hard to stay awake and watch that marvellous moon settle on the sea. So they progressed for two happy days, up and down the shore by streetcar or machine, or by shoe-leather on the crowded boardwalk; sometimes eating with the wealthy, more frequently dining frugally at the expense of an unsuspecting restaurateur.	amazing moon

a dreamless sleep	They reassembled later by the Casino and made arrangements for the night. Kerry wormed permission from the watchman to sleep on the platform and, having collected a huge pile of rugs from the booths to serve as mattresses and blankets, they talked until midnight, and then fell into a dreamless sleep, though Amory tried hard to stay awake and watch that marvellous moon settle on the sea. So they progressed for two happy days, up and down the shore by streetcar or machine, or by shoe-leather on the crowded boardwalk; sometimes eating with the wealthy, more frequently dining frugally at the expense of an unsuspecting restaurateur.	a sleep without dreams

the crowded boardwalk	Kerry wormed permission from the watchman to sleep on the platform and, having collected a huge pile of rugs from the booths to serve as mattresses and blankets, they talked until midnight, and then fell into a dreamless sleep, though Amory tried hard to stay awake and watch that marvellous moon settle on the sea. So they progressed for two happy days, up and down the shore by streetcar or machine, or by shoe-leather on the crowded boardwalk; sometimes eating with the wealthy, more frequently dining frugally at the expense of an unsuspecting restaurateur. They had their photos taken, eight poses, in a quick-development store.	the crowded boardwalk

an unsuspecting restaurateur	Kerry wormed permission from the watchman to sleep on the platform and, having collected a huge pile of rugs from the booths to serve as mattresses and blankets, they talked until midnight, and then fell into a dreamless sleep, though Amory tried hard to stay awake and watch that marvellous moon settle on the sea. So they progressed for two happy days, up and down the shore by streetcar or machine, or by shoe-leather on the crowded boardwalk; sometimes eating with the wealthy, more frequently dining frugally at the expense of an unsuspecting restaurateur. They had their photos taken, eight poses, in a quick-development store.	a restaurant owner who didn't suspect anything

eating with the wealthy, more frequently dining frugally at the expense of an unsuspecting restaurateur.	Kerry wormed permission from the watchman to sleep on the platform and, having collected a huge pile of rugs from the booths to serve as mattresses and blankets, they talked until midnight, and then fell into a dreamless sleep, though Amory tried hard to stay awake and watch that marvellous moon settle on the sea. So they progressed for two happy days, up and down the shore by streetcar or machine, or by shoe-leather on the crowded boardwalk; sometimes eating with the wealthy, more frequently dining frugally at the expense of an unsuspecting restaurateur. They had their photos taken, eight poses, in a quick-development store.	eating with rich people, but more often eating cheaply and not paying the restaurant.

poses, in a quick-development store.	So they progressed for two happy days, up and down the shore by streetcar or machine, or by shoe-leather on the crowded boardwalk; sometimes eating with the wealthy, more frequently dining frugally at the expense of an unsuspecting restaurateur. They had their photos taken, eight poses, in a quick-development store. Kerry insisted on grouping them as a “varsity” football team, and then as a tough gang from the East Side, with their coats inside out, and himself sitting in the middle on a cardboard moon.	pictures taken at a place that develops photos quickly.

gang from the East Side, with their coats inside out, and himself sitting in the middle on a cardboard moon.	They had their photos taken, eight poses, in a quick-development store. Kerry insisted on grouping them as a “varsity” football team, and then as a tough gang from the East Side, with their coats inside out, and himself sitting in the middle on a cardboard moon. The photographer probably has them yet—at least, they never called for them.	a tough East Side gang with their coats reversed, with Kerry sitting on a cardboard moon in the center.

a “varsity” football team	They had their photos taken, eight poses, in a quick-development store. Kerry insisted on grouping them as a “varsity” football team, and then as a tough gang from the East Side, with their coats inside out, and himself sitting in the middle on a cardboard moon. The photographer probably has them yet—at least, they never called for them.	a football team

a cardboard moon	They had their photos taken, eight poses, in a quick-development store. Kerry insisted on grouping them as a “varsity” football team, and then as a tough gang from the East Side, with their coats inside out, and himself sitting in the middle on a cardboard moon. The photographer probably has them yet—at least, they never called for them.	a cardboard moon

broke up with colds in their heads, but otherwise none the worse for wandering.	The weather was perfect, and again they slept outside, and again Amory fell unwillingly asleep. Sunday broke stolid and respectable, and even the sea seemed to mumble and complain, so they returned to Princeton via the Fords of transient farmers, and broke up with colds in their heads, but otherwise none the worse for wandering. Even more than in the year before, Amory neglected his work, not deliberately but lazily and through a multitude of other interests.	They caught colds, but were otherwise unharmed by their trip.

transient farmers	The weather was perfect, and again they slept outside, and again Amory fell unwillingly asleep. Sunday broke stolid and respectable, and even the sea seemed to mumble and complain, so they returned to Princeton via the Fords of transient farmers, and broke up with colds in their heads, but otherwise none the worse for wandering. Even more than in the year before, Amory neglected his work, not deliberately but lazily and through a multitude of other interests.	farmers who didn't stay long

neglected his work, not deliberately but lazily and through a multitude of other interests.	Sunday broke stolid and respectable, and even the sea seemed to mumble and complain, so they returned to Princeton via the Fords of transient farmers, and broke up with colds in their heads, but otherwise none the worse for wandering. Even more than in the year before, Amory neglected his work, not deliberately but lazily and through a multitude of other interests. Coordinate geometry and the melancholy hexameters of Corneille and Racine held forth small allurements, and even psychology, which he had eagerly awaited, proved to be a dull subject full of muscular reactions and biological phrases rather than the study of personality and influence.	He didn't do his schoolwork, not because he planned to, but because he was lazy and had too many other things he wanted to do.

the melancholy hexameters	Even more than in the year before, Amory neglected his work, not deliberately but lazily and through a multitude of other interests. Coordinate geometry and the melancholy hexameters of Corneille and Racine held forth small allurements, and even psychology, which he had eagerly awaited, proved to be a dull subject full of muscular reactions and biological phrases rather than the study of personality and influence. That was a noon class, and it always sent him dozing.	sad poetry

a dull subject	Even more than in the year before, Amory neglected his work, not deliberately but lazily and through a multitude of other interests. Coordinate geometry and the melancholy hexameters of Corneille and Racine held forth small allurements, and even psychology, which he had eagerly awaited, proved to be a dull subject full of muscular reactions and biological phrases rather than the study of personality and influence. That was a noon class, and it always sent him dozing.	a boring topic

full of muscular reactions and biological phrases rather than the study of personality and influence.	Even more than in the year before, Amory neglected his work, not deliberately but lazily and through a multitude of other interests. Coordinate geometry and the melancholy hexameters of Corneille and Racine held forth small allurements, and even psychology, which he had eagerly awaited, proved to be a dull subject full of muscular reactions and biological phrases rather than the study of personality and influence. That was a noon class, and it always sent him dozing.	It was more about physical responses and scientific terms than understanding people and how they affect each other.

muscular reactions	Even more than in the year before, Amory neglected his work, not deliberately but lazily and through a multitude of other interests. Coordinate geometry and the melancholy hexameters of Corneille and Racine held forth small allurements, and even psychology, which he had eagerly awaited, proved to be a dull subject full of muscular reactions and biological phrases rather than the study of personality and influence. That was a noon class, and it always sent him dozing.	muscle responses

small allurements	Even more than in the year before, Amory neglected his work, not deliberately but lazily and through a multitude of other interests. Coordinate geometry and the melancholy hexameters of Corneille and Racine held forth small allurements, and even psychology, which he had eagerly awaited, proved to be a dull subject full of muscular reactions and biological phrases rather than the study of personality and influence. That was a noon class, and it always sent him dozing.	not very interesting

nudged awake by Ferrenby or Sloane to gasp it out.	That was a noon class, and it always sent him dozing. Having found that “subjective and objective, sir,” answered most of the questions, he used the phrase on all occasions, and it became the class joke when, on a query being levelled at him, he was nudged awake by Ferrenby or Sloane to gasp it out. Mostly there were parties—to Orange or the Shore, more rarely to New York and Philadelphia, though one night they marshalled fourteen waitresses out of Childs’ and took them to ride down Fifth Avenue on top of an auto bus.	Ferrenby or Sloane would poke him awake so he could blurt it out.

fourteen waitresses	Having found that “subjective and objective, sir,” answered most of the questions, he used the phrase on all occasions, and it became the class joke when, on a query being levelled at him, he was nudged awake by Ferrenby or Sloane to gasp it out. Mostly there were parties—to Orange or the Shore, more rarely to New York and Philadelphia, though one night they marshalled fourteen waitresses out of Childs’ and took them to ride down Fifth Avenue on top of an auto bus. They all cut more classes than were allowed, which meant an additional course the following year, but spring was too rare to let anything interfere with their colorful ramblings.	fourteen waitresses

top of an auto bus.	Having found that “subjective and objective, sir,” answered most of the questions, he used the phrase on all occasions, and it became the class joke when, on a query being levelled at him, he was nudged awake by Ferrenby or Sloane to gasp it out. Mostly there were parties—to Orange or the Shore, more rarely to New York and Philadelphia, though one night they marshalled fourteen waitresses out of Childs’ and took them to ride down Fifth Avenue on top of an auto bus. They all cut more classes than were allowed, which meant an additional course the following year, but spring was too rare to let anything interfere with their colorful ramblings.	the top of a bus.

their colorful ramblings	Mostly there were parties—to Orange or the Shore, more rarely to New York and Philadelphia, though one night they marshalled fourteen waitresses out of Childs’ and took them to ride down Fifth Avenue on top of an auto bus. They all cut more classes than were allowed, which meant an additional course the following year, but spring was too rare to let anything interfere with their colorful ramblings. In May Amory was elected to the Sophomore Prom Committee, and when after a long evening’s discussion with Alec they made out a tentative list of class probabilities for the senior council, they placed themselves among the surest.	their fun adventures

classes than were allowed, which meant an additional course the following year, but spring was too rare to let anything interfere with their colorful ramblings.	Mostly there were parties—to Orange or the Shore, more rarely to New York and Philadelphia, though one night they marshalled fourteen waitresses out of Childs’ and took them to ride down Fifth Avenue on top of an auto bus. They all cut more classes than were allowed, which meant an additional course the following year, but spring was too rare to let anything interfere with their colorful ramblings. In May Amory was elected to the Sophomore Prom Committee, and when after a long evening’s discussion with Alec they made out a tentative list of class probabilities for the senior council, they placed themselves among the surest.	They skipped more classes than they should have, meaning they'd have to take an extra course next year, but they didn't want anything to stop their fun adventures during the beautiful spring.

the Sophomore Prom Committee	They all cut more classes than were allowed, which meant an additional course the following year, but spring was too rare to let anything interfere with their colorful ramblings. In May Amory was elected to the Sophomore Prom Committee, and when after a long evening’s discussion with Alec they made out a tentative list of class probabilities for the senior council, they placed themselves among the surest. The senior council was composed presumably of the eighteen most representative seniors, and in view of Alec’s football managership and Amory’s chance of nosing out Burne Holiday as Princetonian chairman, they seemed fairly justified in this presumption.	The committee for the sophomore dance

a tentative list	They all cut more classes than were allowed, which meant an additional course the following year, but spring was too rare to let anything interfere with their colorful ramblings. In May Amory was elected to the Sophomore Prom Committee, and when after a long evening’s discussion with Alec they made out a tentative list of class probabilities for the senior council, they placed themselves among the surest. The senior council was composed presumably of the eighteen most representative seniors, and in view of Alec’s football managership and Amory’s chance of nosing out Burne Holiday as Princetonian chairman, they seemed fairly justified in this presumption.	a possible list

a long evening’s discussion	They all cut more classes than were allowed, which meant an additional course the following year, but spring was too rare to let anything interfere with their colorful ramblings. In May Amory was elected to the Sophomore Prom Committee, and when after a long evening’s discussion with Alec they made out a tentative list of class probabilities for the senior council, they placed themselves among the surest. The senior council was composed presumably of the eighteen most representative seniors, and in view of Alec’s football managership and Amory’s chance of nosing out Burne Holiday as Princetonian chairman, they seemed fairly justified in this presumption.	a long evening of talking

elected to the Sophomore Prom Committee, and when after a long evening’s discussion with Alec they made out a tentative list of class probabilities for the senior council, they placed themselves among the surest.	They all cut more classes than were allowed, which meant an additional course the following year, but spring was too rare to let anything interfere with their colorful ramblings. In May Amory was elected to the Sophomore Prom Committee, and when after a long evening’s discussion with Alec they made out a tentative list of class probabilities for the senior council, they placed themselves among the surest. The senior council was composed presumably of the eighteen most representative seniors, and in view of Alec’s football managership and Amory’s chance of nosing out Burne Holiday as Princetonian chairman, they seemed fairly justified in this presumption.	He got on the Sophomore Prom Committee, and after talking with Alec all night, they guessed who was likely to be on the senior council and thought they were almost certain to be chosen.

Princetonian chairman	In May Amory was elected to the Sophomore Prom Committee, and when after a long evening’s discussion with Alec they made out a tentative list of class probabilities for the senior council, they placed themselves among the surest. The senior council was composed presumably of the eighteen most representative seniors, and in view of Alec’s football managership and Amory’s chance of nosing out Burne Holiday as Princetonian chairman, they seemed fairly justified in this presumption. Oddly enough, they both placed D’Invilliers as among the possibilities, a guess that a year before the class would have gaped at.	chairman of the Daily Princetonian newspaper

Alec’s football managership	In May Amory was elected to the Sophomore Prom Committee, and when after a long evening’s discussion with Alec they made out a tentative list of class probabilities for the senior council, they placed themselves among the surest. The senior council was composed presumably of the eighteen most representative seniors, and in view of Alec’s football managership and Amory’s chance of nosing out Burne Holiday as Princetonian chairman, they seemed fairly justified in this presumption. Oddly enough, they both placed D’Invilliers as among the possibilities, a guess that a year before the class would have gaped at.	Alec being the football manager

Amory’s chance	In May Amory was elected to the Sophomore Prom Committee, and when after a long evening’s discussion with Alec they made out a tentative list of class probabilities for the senior council, they placed themselves among the surest. The senior council was composed presumably of the eighteen most representative seniors, and in view of Alec’s football managership and Amory’s chance of nosing out Burne Holiday as Princetonian chairman, they seemed fairly justified in this presumption. Oddly enough, they both placed D’Invilliers as among the possibilities, a guess that a year before the class would have gaped at.	Amory's possibility

the eighteen most representative seniors	In May Amory was elected to the Sophomore Prom Committee, and when after a long evening’s discussion with Alec they made out a tentative list of class probabilities for the senior council, they placed themselves among the surest. The senior council was composed presumably of the eighteen most representative seniors, and in view of Alec’s football managership and Amory’s chance of nosing out Burne Holiday as Princetonian chairman, they seemed fairly justified in this presumption. Oddly enough, they both placed D’Invilliers as among the possibilities, a guess that a year before the class would have gaped at.	the eighteen seniors who best represented the class

justified in this presumption.	In May Amory was elected to the Sophomore Prom Committee, and when after a long evening’s discussion with Alec they made out a tentative list of class probabilities for the senior council, they placed themselves among the surest. The senior council was composed presumably of the eighteen most representative seniors, and in view of Alec’s football managership and Amory’s chance of nosing out Burne Holiday as Princetonian chairman, they seemed fairly justified in this presumption. Oddly enough, they both placed D’Invilliers as among the possibilities, a guess that a year before the class would have gaped at.	right to assume this.

they both placed D’Invilliers as among the possibilities, a guess that a year before the class would have gaped at.	The senior council was composed presumably of the eighteen most representative seniors, and in view of Alec’s football managership and Amory’s chance of nosing out Burne Holiday as Princetonian chairman, they seemed fairly justified in this presumption. Oddly enough, they both placed D’Invilliers as among the possibilities, a guess that a year before the class would have gaped at. All through the spring Amory had kept up an intermittent correspondence with Isabelle Borgé, punctuated by violent squabbles and chiefly enlivened by his attempts to find new words for love.	They thought D'Invilliers might be on the council, which would have shocked everyone a year ago.

correspondence with Isabelle Borgé, punctuated by violent squabbles and chiefly enlivened by his attempts to find new words for love.	Oddly enough, they both placed D’Invilliers as among the possibilities, a guess that a year before the class would have gaped at. All through the spring Amory had kept up an intermittent correspondence with Isabelle Borgé, punctuated by violent squabbles and chiefly enlivened by his attempts to find new words for love. He discovered Isabelle to be discreetly and aggravatingly unsentimental in letters, but he hoped against hope that she would prove not too exotic a bloom to fit the large spaces of spring as she had fitted the den in the Minnehaha Club.	writing to Isabelle Borgé, which included fierce arguments and was mostly made interesting by his efforts to describe love in new ways.

an intermittent correspondence	Oddly enough, they both placed D’Invilliers as among the possibilities, a guess that a year before the class would have gaped at. All through the spring Amory had kept up an intermittent correspondence with Isabelle Borgé, punctuated by violent squabbles and chiefly enlivened by his attempts to find new words for love. He discovered Isabelle to be discreetly and aggravatingly unsentimental in letters, but he hoped against hope that she would prove not too exotic a bloom to fit the large spaces of spring as she had fitted the den in the Minnehaha Club.	occasional letters

violent squabbles	Oddly enough, they both placed D’Invilliers as among the possibilities, a guess that a year before the class would have gaped at. All through the spring Amory had kept up an intermittent correspondence with Isabelle Borgé, punctuated by violent squabbles and chiefly enlivened by his attempts to find new words for love. He discovered Isabelle to be discreetly and aggravatingly unsentimental in letters, but he hoped against hope that she would prove not too exotic a bloom to fit the large spaces of spring as she had fitted the den in the Minnehaha Club.	fierce arguments

hope that she would prove not too exotic a bloom to fit the large spaces of spring as she had fitted the den in the Minnehaha Club.	All through the spring Amory had kept up an intermittent correspondence with Isabelle Borgé, punctuated by violent squabbles and chiefly enlivened by his attempts to find new words for love. He discovered Isabelle to be discreetly and aggravatingly unsentimental in letters, but he hoped against hope that she would prove not too exotic a bloom to fit the large spaces of spring as she had fitted the den in the Minnehaha Club. During May he wrote thirty-page documents almost nightly, and sent them to her in bulky envelopes exteriorly labelled “Part I” and “Part II.”	hope that she would fit into his life during the spring as well as she had in the small room at the Minnehaha Club.

the Minnehaha Club	All through the spring Amory had kept up an intermittent correspondence with Isabelle Borgé, punctuated by violent squabbles and chiefly enlivened by his attempts to find new words for love. He discovered Isabelle to be discreetly and aggravatingly unsentimental in letters, but he hoped against hope that she would prove not too exotic a bloom to fit the large spaces of spring as she had fitted the den in the Minnehaha Club. During May he wrote thirty-page documents almost nightly, and sent them to her in bulky envelopes exteriorly labelled “Part I” and “Part II.”	the Minnehaha Club

not too exotic a bloom	All through the spring Amory had kept up an intermittent correspondence with Isabelle Borgé, punctuated by violent squabbles and chiefly enlivened by his attempts to find new words for love. He discovered Isabelle to be discreetly and aggravatingly unsentimental in letters, but he hoped against hope that she would prove not too exotic a bloom to fit the large spaces of spring as she had fitted the den in the Minnehaha Club. During May he wrote thirty-page documents almost nightly, and sent them to her in bulky envelopes exteriorly labelled “Part I” and “Part II.”	not too unusual or strange

bulky envelopes	He discovered Isabelle to be discreetly and aggravatingly unsentimental in letters, but he hoped against hope that she would prove not too exotic a bloom to fit the large spaces of spring as she had fitted the den in the Minnehaha Club. During May he wrote thirty-page documents almost nightly, and sent them to her in bulky envelopes exteriorly labelled “Part I” and “Part II.” “Oh, Alec, I believe I’m tired of college,” he said sadly, as they walked the dusk together.	large envelopes

wrote thirty-page documents almost nightly, and sent them to her in bulky envelopes exteriorly labelled “Part I” and “Part II.”	He discovered Isabelle to be discreetly and aggravatingly unsentimental in letters, but he hoped against hope that she would prove not too exotic a bloom to fit the large spaces of spring as she had fitted the den in the Minnehaha Club. During May he wrote thirty-page documents almost nightly, and sent them to her in bulky envelopes exteriorly labelled “Part I” and “Part II.” “Oh, Alec, I believe I’m tired of college,” he said sadly, as they walked the dusk together.	wrote long letters almost every night, sending them to her in thick envelopes labeled "Part I" and "Part II."

walked the dusk together.	During May he wrote thirty-page documents almost nightly, and sent them to her in bulky envelopes exteriorly labelled “Part I” and “Part II.” “Oh, Alec, I believe I’m tired of college,” he said sadly, as they walked the dusk together. “I think I am, too, in a way.”	walked together at dusk.

home in the country, some warm country, and a wife, and just enough to do to keep from rotting.”	“I think I am, too, in a way.” “All I’d like would be a little home in the country, some warm country, and a wife, and just enough to do to keep from rotting.” “Me, too.”	A house in the warm countryside, a wife, and just enough work to stay active.

gasped in horror.	“Oh!” Amory gasped in horror. “She wouldn’t think of marrying.	gasped in horror.

think of marrying.	Amory gasped in horror. “She wouldn’t think of marrying. that is, not now.	think about getting married.

forthcoming as it used to be.”	But marry—not a chance. Especially as father says the money isn’t forthcoming as it used to be.” “What a waste these nights are!” agreed Alec.	coming as easily as it used to.

picture before him, write her rapturous letters.	But Amory sighed and made use of the nights. He had a snapshot of Isabelle, enshrined in an old watch, and at eight almost every night he would turn off all the lights except the desk lamp and, sitting by the open windows with the picture before him, write her rapturous letters. Oh it’s so hard to write you what I really feel when I think about you so much; you’ve gotten to mean to me a dream that I can’t put on paper any more.	write her passionate letters.

her rapturous letters	But Amory sighed and made use of the nights. He had a snapshot of Isabelle, enshrined in an old watch, and at eight almost every night he would turn off all the lights except the desk lamp and, sitting by the open windows with the picture before him, write her rapturous letters. Oh it’s so hard to write you what I really feel when I think about you so much; you’ve gotten to mean to me a dream that I can’t put on paper any more.	passionate letters

put on paper any more.	He had a snapshot of Isabelle, enshrined in an old watch, and at eight almost every night he would turn off all the lights except the desk lamp and, sitting by the open windows with the picture before him, write her rapturous letters. Oh it’s so hard to write you what I really feel when I think about you so much; you’ve gotten to mean to me a dream that I can’t put on paper any more. Your last letter came and it was wonderful!	fully express in writing anymore.

read it over about six times, especially the last part, but I do wish, sometimes, you’d be more frank and tell me what you really do think of me, yet your last letter was too good to be true, and I can hardly wait until June!	Your last letter came and it was wonderful! I read it over about six times, especially the last part, but I do wish, sometimes, you’d be more frank and tell me what you really do think of me, yet your last letter was too good to be true, and I can hardly wait until June! Be sure and be able to come to the prom.	I read it about six times, especially the end, but I still wish you'd be more open and tell me what you really think of me. Your last letter seemed too good to be true, and I can't wait for June!

come to the prom.	I read it over about six times, especially the last part, but I do wish, sometimes, you’d be more frank and tell me what you really do think of me, yet your last letter was too good to be true, and I can hardly wait until June! Be sure and be able to come to the prom. It’ll be fine, I think, and I want to bring you just at the end of a wonderful year.	Come to the prom.

end of a wonderful year.	Be sure and be able to come to the prom. It’ll be fine, I think, and I want to bring you just at the end of a wonderful year. I often think over what you said on that night and wonder how much you meant.	end of a great year.

said on that night and wonder how much you meant.	It’ll be fine, I think, and I want to bring you just at the end of a wonderful year. I often think over what you said on that night and wonder how much you meant. If it were anyone but you—but you see I thought you were fickle the first time I saw you and you are so popular and everthing that I can’t imagine you really liking me best.	said that night and wonder how serious you were.

imagine you really liking me best.	I often think over what you said on that night and wonder how much you meant. If it were anyone but you—but you see I thought you were fickle the first time I saw you and you are so popular and everthing that I can’t imagine you really liking me best. Oh, Isabelle, dear—it’s a wonderful night.	imagine you really liking me more than anyone else.

playing “Love Moon” on a mandolin far across the campus, and the music seems to bring you into the window.	Oh, Isabelle, dear—it’s a wonderful night. Somebody is playing “Love Moon” on a mandolin far across the campus, and the music seems to bring you into the window. Now he’s playing “Goodbye, Boys, I’m Through,” and how well it suits me.	playing "Love Moon" on a mandolin way over on the other side of campus, and the music makes me feel like you're right here with me.

Goodbye, Boys, I’m Through,” and how well it suits me.	Somebody is playing “Love Moon” on a mandolin far across the campus, and the music seems to bring you into the window. Now he’s playing “Goodbye, Boys, I’m Through,” and how well it suits me. For I am through with everything.	Goodbye, Boys, I'm Through," and it really fits how I feel.

part of my days and nights to ever let me think of another girl.	For I am through with everything. I have decided never to take a cocktail again, and I know I’ll never again fall in love—I couldn’t—you’ve been too much a part of my days and nights to ever let me think of another girl. I meet them all the time and they don’t interest me.	You're too much a part of my life for me to ever think about another girl.

pretending to be blasé, because it’s not that.	I meet them all the time and they don’t interest me. I’m not pretending to be blasé, because it’s not that. It’s just that I’m in love.	faking indifference, because that's not it.

just Isabelle	It’s just that I’m in love. Oh, dearest Isabelle (somehow I can’t call you just Isabelle, and I’m afraid I’ll come out with the “dearest” before your family this June), you’ve got to come to the prom, and then I’ll come up to your house for a day and everything’ll be perfect. And so on in an eternal monotone that seemed to both of them infinitely charming, infinitely new.	Isabelle

come up to your house for a day and everything’ll be perfect.	It’s just that I’m in love. Oh, dearest Isabelle (somehow I can’t call you just Isabelle, and I’m afraid I’ll come out with the “dearest” before your family this June), you’ve got to come to the prom, and then I’ll come up to your house for a day and everything’ll be perfect. And so on in an eternal monotone that seemed to both of them infinitely charming, infinitely new.	visit you at your house for a day, and everything will be perfect.

an eternal monotone	Oh, dearest Isabelle (somehow I can’t call you just Isabelle, and I’m afraid I’ll come out with the “dearest” before your family this June), you’ve got to come to the prom, and then I’ll come up to your house for a day and everything’ll be perfect. And so on in an eternal monotone that seemed to both of them infinitely charming, infinitely new.	endless repetition

both of them infinitely charming, infinitely new.	Oh, dearest Isabelle (somehow I can’t call you just Isabelle, and I’m afraid I’ll come out with the “dearest” before your family this June), you’ve got to come to the prom, and then I’ll come up to your house for a day and everything’ll be perfect. And so on in an eternal monotone that seemed to both of them infinitely charming, infinitely new.	They both found it endlessly delightful and fresh.

dreamy evenings	June came and the days grew so hot and lazy that they could not worry even about exams, but spent dreamy evenings on the court of Cottage, talking of long subjects until the sweep of country toward Stony Brook became a blue haze and the lilacs were white around tennis-courts, and words gave way to silent cigarettes. Then down deserted Prospect and along McCosh with song everywhere around them, up to the hot joviality of Nassau Street.	relaxed and pleasant evenings

gave way to silent cigarettes.	June came and the days grew so hot and lazy that they could not worry even about exams, but spent dreamy evenings on the court of Cottage, talking of long subjects until the sweep of country toward Stony Brook became a blue haze and the lilacs were white around tennis-courts, and words gave way to silent cigarettes. Then down deserted Prospect and along McCosh with song everywhere around them, up to the hot joviality of Nassau Street.	were replaced by quiet smoking.

a blue haze	June came and the days grew so hot and lazy that they could not worry even about exams, but spent dreamy evenings on the court of Cottage, talking of long subjects until the sweep of country toward Stony Brook became a blue haze and the lilacs were white around tennis-courts, and words gave way to silent cigarettes. Then down deserted Prospect and along McCosh with song everywhere around them, up to the hot joviality of Nassau Street.	a hazy blue

the hot joviality	June came and the days grew so hot and lazy that they could not worry even about exams, but spent dreamy evenings on the court of Cottage, talking of long subjects until the sweep of country toward Stony Brook became a blue haze and the lilacs were white around tennis-courts, and words gave way to silent cigarettes. Then down deserted Prospect and along McCosh with song everywhere around them, up to the hot joviality of Nassau Street. Tom D’Invilliers and Amory walked late in those days.	the lively heat

up to the hot joviality of Nassau Street.	June came and the days grew so hot and lazy that they could not worry even about exams, but spent dreamy evenings on the court of Cottage, talking of long subjects until the sweep of country toward Stony Brook became a blue haze and the lilacs were white around tennis-courts, and words gave way to silent cigarettes. Then down deserted Prospect and along McCosh with song everywhere around them, up to the hot joviality of Nassau Street. Tom D’Invilliers and Amory walked late in those days.	to the lively and bustling atmosphere of Nassau Street.

Tom D’Invilliers	Then down deserted Prospect and along McCosh with song everywhere around them, up to the hot joviality of Nassau Street. Tom D’Invilliers and Amory walked late in those days. A gambling fever swept through the sophomore class and they bent over the bones till three o’clock many a sultry night.	Tom D'Invilliers

three o’clock	Tom D’Invilliers and Amory walked late in those days. A gambling fever swept through the sophomore class and they bent over the bones till three o’clock many a sultry night. After one session they came out of Sloane’s room to find the dew fallen and the stars old in the sky.	3 AM

the sophomore class	Tom D’Invilliers and Amory walked late in those days. A gambling fever swept through the sophomore class and they bent over the bones till three o’clock many a sultry night. After one session they came out of Sloane’s room to find the dew fallen and the stars old in the sky.	the second-year students

swept through the sophomore class and they bent over the bones till three o’clock many a sultry night.	Tom D’Invilliers and Amory walked late in those days. A gambling fever swept through the sophomore class and they bent over the bones till three o’clock many a sultry night. After one session they came out of Sloane’s room to find the dew fallen and the stars old in the sky.	spread through the sophomore class and they played dice until three o'clock on many hot nights.

came out of Sloane’s room to find the dew fallen and the stars old in the sky.	A gambling fever swept through the sophomore class and they bent over the bones till three o’clock many a sultry night. After one session they came out of Sloane’s room to find the dew fallen and the stars old in the sky. “Let’s borrow bicycles and take a ride,” Amory suggested.	left Sloane's room and saw the dew had settled and the stars were fading in the sky.

Sloane’s room	A gambling fever swept through the sophomore class and they bent over the bones till three o’clock many a sultry night. After one session they came out of Sloane’s room to find the dew fallen and the stars old in the sky. “Let’s borrow bicycles and take a ride,” Amory suggested.	Sloane's room

the prom stuff	“All right. I’m not a bit tired and this is almost the last night of the year, really, because the prom stuff starts Monday.” They found two unlocked bicycles in Holder Court and rode out about half-past three along the Lawrenceville Road.	prom activities

the Lawrenceville Road	I’m not a bit tired and this is almost the last night of the year, really, because the prom stuff starts Monday.” They found two unlocked bicycles in Holder Court and rode out about half-past three along the Lawrenceville Road. “What are you going to do this summer, Amory?” “Don’t ask me—same old things, I suppose.	Lawrenceville Road

three along the Lawrenceville Road.	I’m not a bit tired and this is almost the last night of the year, really, because the prom stuff starts Monday.” They found two unlocked bicycles in Holder Court and rode out about half-past three along the Lawrenceville Road. “What are you going to do this summer, Amory?” “Don’t ask me—same old things, I suppose.	three on Lawrenceville Road.

be there in July, you know—then there’ll be Minneapolis, and that means hundreds of summer hops, parlor-snaking, getting bored—	“What are you going to do this summer, Amory?” “Don’t ask me—same old things, I suppose. A month or two in Lake Geneva—I’m counting on you to be there in July, you know—then there’ll be Minneapolis, and that means hundreds of summer hops, parlor-snaking, getting bored— But oh, Tom,” he added suddenly, “hasn’t this year been slick!”	be there in July, okay? Then I'll be in Minneapolis, which means tons of summer dances, flirting at parties, and getting bored.

I’m counting	“What are you going to do this summer, Amory?” “Don’t ask me—same old things, I suppose. A month or two in Lake Geneva—I’m counting on you to be there in July, you know—then there’ll be Minneapolis, and that means hundreds of summer hops, parlor-snaking, getting bored— But oh, Tom,” he added suddenly, “hasn’t this year been slick!”	I'm expecting

feel as if I never want to play another.	But oh, Tom,” he added suddenly, “hasn’t this year been slick!” “No,” declared Tom emphatically, a new Tom, clothed by Brooks, shod by Franks, “I’ve won this game, but I feel as if I never want to play another. You’re all right—you’re a rubber ball, and somehow it suits you, but I’m sick of adapting myself to the local snobbishness of this corner of the world.	I don't ever want to play this game again.

the local snobbishness	“No,” declared Tom emphatically, a new Tom, clothed by Brooks, shod by Franks, “I’ve won this game, but I feel as if I never want to play another. You’re all right—you’re a rubber ball, and somehow it suits you, but I’m sick of adapting myself to the local snobbishness of this corner of the world. I want to go where people aren’t barred because of the color of their neckties and the roll of their coats.”	the snobbery around here

go where people aren’t barred because of the color of their neckties and the roll of their coats.”	You’re all right—you’re a rubber ball, and somehow it suits you, but I’m sick of adapting myself to the local snobbishness of this corner of the world. I want to go where people aren’t barred because of the color of their neckties and the roll of their coats.” “You can’t, Tom,” argued Amory, as they rolled along through the scattering night; “wherever you go now you’ll always unconsciously apply these standards of ‘having it’ or ‘lacking it.’	go where people aren't judged by their appearance and wealth.

the scattering night	I want to go where people aren’t barred because of the color of their neckties and the roll of their coats.” “You can’t, Tom,” argued Amory, as they rolled along through the scattering night; “wherever you go now you’ll always unconsciously apply these standards of ‘having it’ or ‘lacking it.’ For better or worse we’ve stamped you; you’re a Princeton type!”	the fading night

rolled along through the scattering night; “wherever you go now you’ll always unconsciously apply these standards of ‘having it’ or ‘lacking it.’	I want to go where people aren’t barred because of the color of their neckties and the roll of their coats.” “You can’t, Tom,” argued Amory, as they rolled along through the scattering night; “wherever you go now you’ll always unconsciously apply these standards of ‘having it’ or ‘lacking it.’ For better or worse we’ve stamped you; you’re a Princeton type!”	drove through the fading night; "everywhere you go, you'll always unconsciously judge people by whether they 'have it' or 'lack it.'"

stamped you; you’re a Princeton type!”	“You can’t, Tom,” argued Amory, as they rolled along through the scattering night; “wherever you go now you’ll always unconsciously apply these standards of ‘having it’ or ‘lacking it.’ For better or worse we’ve stamped you; you’re a Princeton type!” “Well, then,” complained Tom, his cracked voice rising plaintively, “why do I have to come back at all?	marked you; you're a Princeton type!

mere pedantry	I’ve learned all that Princeton has to offer. Two years more of mere pedantry and lying around a club aren’t going to help. They’re just going to disorganize me, conventionalize me completely.	just nitpicking

lying around a club aren’t going to help.	I’ve learned all that Princeton has to offer. Two years more of mere pedantry and lying around a club aren’t going to help. They’re just going to disorganize me, conventionalize me completely.	hanging out at a club won't help.

opened to the snobbishness of the world in a rather abrupt manner.	“Oh, but you’re missing the real point, Tom,” Amory interrupted. “You’ve just had your eyes opened to the snobbishness of the world in a rather abrupt manner. Princeton invariably gives the thoughtful man a social sense.”	suddenly realized how snobby the world can be.

a rather abrupt manner	“Oh, but you’re missing the real point, Tom,” Amory interrupted. “You’ve just had your eyes opened to the snobbishness of the world in a rather abrupt manner. Princeton invariably gives the thoughtful man a social sense.”	kind of suddenly

the thoughtful man	“You’ve just had your eyes opened to the snobbishness of the world in a rather abrupt manner. Princeton invariably gives the thoughtful man a social sense.” “You consider you taught me that, don’t you?”	someone who thinks deeply

eying Amory in the half dark.	“You consider you taught me that, don’t you?” he asked quizzically, eying Amory in the half dark. Amory laughed quietly.	looking at Amory in the dim light.

’s rather hard.	I might have been a pretty fair poet.” “Come on, that’s rather hard. You chose to come to an Eastern college.	That's pretty tough.

the mean scrambling quality	You chose to come to an Eastern college. Either your eyes were opened to the mean scrambling quality of people, or you’d have gone through blind, and you’d hate to have done that—been like Marty Kaye.” “Yes,” he agreed, “you’re right.	the unpleasant, competitive nature

gone through blind, and you’d hate to have done that—been like Marty Kaye.”	You chose to come to an Eastern college. Either your eyes were opened to the mean scrambling quality of people, or you’d have gone through blind, and you’d hate to have done that—been like Marty Kaye.” “Yes,” he agreed, “you’re right.	gone through life without seeing things clearly, and you'd hate to have been like that—like Marty Kaye.

made a cynic at twenty.”	I wouldn’t have liked it. Still, it’s hard to be made a cynic at twenty.” “I was born one,” Amory murmured.	turned into a cynic at twenty.

a cynical idealist	“I was born one,” Amory murmured. “I’m a cynical idealist.” He paused and wondered if that meant anything.	a cynical idealist

school of Lawrenceville, and turned to ride back.	He paused and wondered if that meant anything. They reached the sleeping school of Lawrenceville, and turned to ride back. “It’s good, this ride, isn’t it?”	Lawrenceville school, and turned around to ride back.

a hot, languorous summer	“Yes; it’s a good finish, it’s knockout; everything’s good tonight. Oh, for a hot, languorous summer and Isabelle!” “Oh, you and your Isabelle!	a hot, lazy summer

said Amory as he finished.	So Amory declaimed “The Ode to a Nightingale” to the bushes they passed. “I’ll never be a poet,” said Amory as he finished. “I’m not enough of a sensualist really; there are only a few obvious things that I notice as primarily beautiful: women, spring evenings, music at night, the sea; I don’t catch the subtle things like ‘silver-snarling trumpets.’	Amory said as he finished.

only a few obvious things	“I’ll never be a poet,” said Amory as he finished. “I’m not enough of a sensualist really; there are only a few obvious things that I notice as primarily beautiful: women, spring evenings, music at night, the sea; I don’t catch the subtle things like ‘silver-snarling trumpets.’ I may turn out an intellectual, but I’ll never write anything but mediocre poetry.”	just the most obvious things

music at night, the sea; I don’t catch the subtle things like ‘silver-snarling trumpets.’	“I’ll never be a poet,” said Amory as he finished. “I’m not enough of a sensualist really; there are only a few obvious things that I notice as primarily beautiful: women, spring evenings, music at night, the sea; I don’t catch the subtle things like ‘silver-snarling trumpets.’ I may turn out an intellectual, but I’ll never write anything but mediocre poetry.”	music at night, the sea; I don't notice the finer details, like 'silver-snarling trumpets.'

‘silver-snarling trumpets	“I’ll never be a poet,” said Amory as he finished. “I’m not enough of a sensualist really; there are only a few obvious things that I notice as primarily beautiful: women, spring evenings, music at night, the sea; I don’t catch the subtle things like ‘silver-snarling trumpets.’ I may turn out an intellectual, but I’ll never write anything but mediocre poetry.”	trumpets that sound sharp and bright

anything but mediocre poetry.”	“I’m not enough of a sensualist really; there are only a few obvious things that I notice as primarily beautiful: women, spring evenings, music at night, the sea; I don’t catch the subtle things like ‘silver-snarling trumpets.’ I may turn out an intellectual, but I’ll never write anything but mediocre poetry.” They rode into Princeton as the sun was making colored maps of the sky behind the graduate school, and hurried to the refreshment of a shower that would have to serve in place of sleep.	only average poetry.

mediocre poetry	“I’m not enough of a sensualist really; there are only a few obvious things that I notice as primarily beautiful: women, spring evenings, music at night, the sea; I don’t catch the subtle things like ‘silver-snarling trumpets.’ I may turn out an intellectual, but I’ll never write anything but mediocre poetry.” They rode into Princeton as the sun was making colored maps of the sky behind the graduate school, and hurried to the refreshment of a shower that would have to serve in place of sleep.	average poetry

serve in place of sleep.	I may turn out an intellectual, but I’ll never write anything but mediocre poetry.” They rode into Princeton as the sun was making colored maps of the sky behind the graduate school, and hurried to the refreshment of a shower that would have to serve in place of sleep. By noon the bright-costumed alumni crowded the streets with their bands and choruses, and in the tents there was great reunion under the orange-and-black banners that curled and strained in the wind.	act as a substitute for sleep.

banners that curled and strained in the wind.	They rode into Princeton as the sun was making colored maps of the sky behind the graduate school, and hurried to the refreshment of a shower that would have to serve in place of sleep. By noon the bright-costumed alumni crowded the streets with their bands and choruses, and in the tents there was great reunion under the orange-and-black banners that curled and strained in the wind. Amory looked long at one house which bore the legend “Sixty-nine.”	banners that twisted and pulled in the wind.

the bright-costumed alumni	They rode into Princeton as the sun was making colored maps of the sky behind the graduate school, and hurried to the refreshment of a shower that would have to serve in place of sleep. By noon the bright-costumed alumni crowded the streets with their bands and choruses, and in the tents there was great reunion under the orange-and-black banners that curled and strained in the wind. Amory looked long at one house which bore the legend “Sixty-nine.”	alumni in colorful outfits

legend “Sixty-nine.”	By noon the bright-costumed alumni crowded the streets with their bands and choruses, and in the tents there was great reunion under the orange-and-black banners that curled and strained in the wind. Amory looked long at one house which bore the legend “Sixty-nine.” There a few gray-haired men sat and talked quietly while the classes swept by in panorama of life.	sign "Sixty-nine."

talked quietly while the classes swept by in panorama of life.	Amory looked long at one house which bore the legend “Sixty-nine.” There a few gray-haired men sat and talked quietly while the classes swept by in panorama of life.	talked quietly as students walked past.

a few gray-haired men	Amory looked long at one house which bore the legend “Sixty-nine.” There a few gray-haired men sat and talked quietly while the classes swept by in panorama of life.	some old men

tragedy’s emerald eyes	Then tragedy’s emerald eyes glared suddenly at Amory over the edge of June. On the night after his ride to Lawrenceville a crowd sallied to New York in quest of adventure, and started back to Princeton about twelve o’clock in two machines.	sudden misfortune

sallied to New York in quest of adventure, and started back to Princeton about twelve o’clock in two machines.	Then tragedy’s emerald eyes glared suddenly at Amory over the edge of June. On the night after his ride to Lawrenceville a crowd sallied to New York in quest of adventure, and started back to Princeton about twelve o’clock in two machines. It had been a gay party and different stages of sobriety were represented.	went to New York looking for excitement, and headed back to Princeton around midnight in two cars.

about twelve o’clock	Then tragedy’s emerald eyes glared suddenly at Amory over the edge of June. On the night after his ride to Lawrenceville a crowd sallied to New York in quest of adventure, and started back to Princeton about twelve o’clock in two machines. It had been a gay party and different stages of sobriety were represented.	around midnight

stages of sobriety were represented.	On the night after his ride to Lawrenceville a crowd sallied to New York in quest of adventure, and started back to Princeton about twelve o’clock in two machines. It had been a gay party and different stages of sobriety were represented. Amory was in the car behind; they had taken the wrong road and lost the way, and so were hurrying to catch up.	people were in varying states of drunkenness.

was in the car behind; they had taken the wrong road and lost the way, and so were hurrying to catch up.	It had been a gay party and different stages of sobriety were represented. Amory was in the car behind; they had taken the wrong road and lost the way, and so were hurrying to catch up. It was a clear night and the exhilaration of the road went to Amory’s head.	was in the car behind because they'd gotten lost and were rushing to catch up.

Amory’s head	Amory was in the car behind; they had taken the wrong road and lost the way, and so were hurrying to catch up. It was a clear night and the exhilaration of the road went to Amory’s head. He had the ghost of two stanzas of a poem forming in his mind.	Amory's head

exhilaration of the road went to Amory’s head.	Amory was in the car behind; they had taken the wrong road and lost the way, and so were hurrying to catch up. It was a clear night and the exhilaration of the road went to Amory’s head. He had the ghost of two stanzas of a poem forming in his mind.	Amory felt thrilled and excited by being on the road.

two stanzas	It was a clear night and the exhilaration of the road went to Amory’s head. He had the ghost of two stanzas of a poem forming in his mind. So the gray car crept nightward in the dark and there was no life stirred as it went by.	two verses

stanzas of a poem forming in his mind.	It was a clear night and the exhilaration of the road went to Amory’s head. He had the ghost of two stanzas of a poem forming in his mind. So the gray car crept nightward in the dark and there was no life stirred as it went by.	lines of a poem coming together in his head.

life stirred as it went by.	He had the ghost of two stanzas of a poem forming in his mind. So the gray car crept nightward in the dark and there was no life stirred as it went by. As the still ocean paths before the shark in starred and glittering waterways, beauty-high, the moon-swathed trees divided, pair on pair, while flapping nightbirds cried across the air.	life moved as it passed.

the moon-swathed trees	So the gray car crept nightward in the dark and there was no life stirred as it went by. As the still ocean paths before the shark in starred and glittering waterways, beauty-high, the moon-swathed trees divided, pair on pair, while flapping nightbirds cried across the air. A moment by an inn of lamps and shades, a yellow inn under a yellow moon—then silence, where crescendo laughter fades.	trees covered in moonlight

shark in starred and glittering waterways, beauty-high, the moon-swathed trees divided, pair on pair, while flapping nightbirds cried across the air.	So the gray car crept nightward in the dark and there was no life stirred as it went by. As the still ocean paths before the shark in starred and glittering waterways, beauty-high, the moon-swathed trees divided, pair on pair, while flapping nightbirds cried across the air. A moment by an inn of lamps and shades, a yellow inn under a yellow moon—then silence, where crescendo laughter fades.	like a shark in sparkling water under the stars, magnificent, the moonlit trees split apart in pairs, and nightbirds called out in the air.

starred and glittering waterways	So the gray car crept nightward in the dark and there was no life stirred as it went by. As the still ocean paths before the shark in starred and glittering waterways, beauty-high, the moon-swathed trees divided, pair on pair, while flapping nightbirds cried across the air. A moment by an inn of lamps and shades, a yellow inn under a yellow moon—then silence, where crescendo laughter fades.	starry and sparkling waters

flapping nightbirds	So the gray car crept nightward in the dark and there was no life stirred as it went by. As the still ocean paths before the shark in starred and glittering waterways, beauty-high, the moon-swathed trees divided, pair on pair, while flapping nightbirds cried across the air. A moment by an inn of lamps and shades, a yellow inn under a yellow moon—then silence, where crescendo laughter fades.	Nightbirds flying

crescendo laughter	As the still ocean paths before the shark in starred and glittering waterways, beauty-high, the moon-swathed trees divided, pair on pair, while flapping nightbirds cried across the air. A moment by an inn of lamps and shades, a yellow inn under a yellow moon—then silence, where crescendo laughter fades. the car swung out again to the winds of June, mellowed the shadows where the distance grew, then crushed the yellow shadows into blue.	laughter that gets louder and louder

moment by an inn of lamps and shades, a yellow inn under a yellow moon—then silence, where crescendo laughter fades.	As the still ocean paths before the shark in starred and glittering waterways, beauty-high, the moon-swathed trees divided, pair on pair, while flapping nightbirds cried across the air. A moment by an inn of lamps and shades, a yellow inn under a yellow moon—then silence, where crescendo laughter fades. the car swung out again to the winds of June, mellowed the shadows where the distance grew, then crushed the yellow shadows into blue.	A moment by an inn with lamps and shades, a yellow inn under a yellow moon—then silence, as the laughter grows quiet.

swung out again to the winds of June, mellowed the shadows where the distance grew, then crushed the yellow shadows into blue.	A moment by an inn of lamps and shades, a yellow inn under a yellow moon—then silence, where crescendo laughter fades. the car swung out again to the winds of June, mellowed the shadows where the distance grew, then crushed the yellow shadows into blue. They jolted to a stop, and Amory peered up, startled.	turned back into the June winds, softened the shadows as they drove further away, then turned the yellow shadows into blue ones.

jolted to a stop, and Amory peered up, startled.	the car swung out again to the winds of June, mellowed the shadows where the distance grew, then crushed the yellow shadows into blue. They jolted to a stop, and Amory peered up, startled. A woman was standing beside the road, talking to Alec at the wheel.	stopped abruptly, and Amory looked up, surprised.

talking to Alec at the wheel.	They jolted to a stop, and Amory peered up, startled. A woman was standing beside the road, talking to Alec at the wheel. Afterward he remembered the harpy effect that her old kimono gave her, and the cracked hollowness of her voice as she spoke: “You Princeton boys?”	talking to Alec who was driving.

the cracked hollowness	A woman was standing beside the road, talking to Alec at the wheel. Afterward he remembered the harpy effect that her old kimono gave her, and the cracked hollowness of her voice as she spoke: “You Princeton boys?” “Yes.”	the broken emptiness

the harpy effect	A woman was standing beside the road, talking to Alec at the wheel. Afterward he remembered the harpy effect that her old kimono gave her, and the cracked hollowness of her voice as she spoke: “You Princeton boys?” “Yes.”	She looked like a harpy.

her old kimono	A woman was standing beside the road, talking to Alec at the wheel. Afterward he remembered the harpy effect that her old kimono gave her, and the cracked hollowness of her voice as she spoke: “You Princeton boys?” “Yes.”	her old robe

gazed in horror.	“Look!” She pointed and they gazed in horror. Under the full light of a roadside arc-light lay a form, face downward in a widening circle of blood.	looked in horror.

a widening circle	She pointed and they gazed in horror. Under the full light of a roadside arc-light lay a form, face downward in a widening circle of blood. They sprang from the car.	a growing pool

light of a roadside arc-light lay a form, face downward in a widening circle of blood.	She pointed and they gazed in horror. Under the full light of a roadside arc-light lay a form, face downward in a widening circle of blood. They sprang from the car.	Under the street light was a body, face down in a growing pool of blood.

a roadside arc-light	She pointed and they gazed in horror. Under the full light of a roadside arc-light lay a form, face downward in a widening circle of blood. They sprang from the car.	a street light

back of that head—that hair—that hair.	They sprang from the car. Amory thought of the back of that head—that hair—that hair. and then they turned the form over.	the back of her head—that hair—her hair.

Dick—Dick Humbird!”	and then they turned the form over. “It’s Dick—Dick Humbird!” “Oh, Christ!”	Dick! Dick Humbird!

sort of croaking triumph: “He’s quite dead, all right.	“Feel his heart!” Then the insistent voice of the old crone in a sort of croaking triumph: “He’s quite dead, all right. The car turned over.	sort of croaking triumph: "He's definitely dead, that's for sure."

croaking triumph	“Feel his heart!” Then the insistent voice of the old crone in a sort of croaking triumph: “He’s quite dead, all right. The car turned over.	a croaky, victorious voice

the insistent voice	“Feel his heart!” Then the insistent voice of the old crone in a sort of croaking triumph: “He’s quite dead, all right. The car turned over.	the persistent voice

the old crone	“Feel his heart!” Then the insistent voice of the old crone in a sort of croaking triumph: “He’s quite dead, all right. The car turned over.	the old woman

Two of the men that weren’t hurt just carried the others in, but this one’s no use.”	The car turned over. Two of the men that weren’t hurt just carried the others in, but this one’s no use.” Amory rushed into the house and the rest followed with a limp mass that they laid on the sofa in the shoddy little front parlor.	Two of the uninjured men carried the others inside, but this one is beyond help.

the shoddy little front parlor	Two of the men that weren’t hurt just carried the others in, but this one’s no use.” Amory rushed into the house and the rest followed with a limp mass that they laid on the sofa in the shoddy little front parlor. Sloane, with his shoulder punctured, was on another lounge.	the cheap little living room

mass that they laid on the sofa in the shoddy little front parlor.	Two of the men that weren’t hurt just carried the others in, but this one’s no use.” Amory rushed into the house and the rest followed with a limp mass that they laid on the sofa in the shoddy little front parlor. Sloane, with his shoulder punctured, was on another lounge.	body they put on the sofa in the cheap little living room.

a limp mass	Two of the men that weren’t hurt just carried the others in, but this one’s no use.” Amory rushed into the house and the rest followed with a limp mass that they laid on the sofa in the shoddy little front parlor. Sloane, with his shoulder punctured, was on another lounge.	a person who couldn't move

lecture at 8:10.	Sloane, with his shoulder punctured, was on another lounge. He was half delirious, and kept calling something about a chemistry lecture at 8:10. “I don’t know what happened,” said Ferrenby in a strained voice.	lecture at 8:10.

Ferrenby in a strained voice.	He was half delirious, and kept calling something about a chemistry lecture at 8:10. “I don’t know what happened,” said Ferrenby in a strained voice. “Dick was driving and he wouldn’t give up the wheel; we told him he’d been drinking too much—then there was this damn curve—	Ferrenby said, his voice tight.

a strained voice	He was half delirious, and kept calling something about a chemistry lecture at 8:10. “I don’t know what happened,” said Ferrenby in a strained voice. “Dick was driving and he wouldn’t give up the wheel; we told him he’d been drinking too much—then there was this damn curve—	a tense voice

dry sobs	oh, my God!.” He threw himself face downward on the floor and broke into dry sobs. The doctor had arrived, and Amory went over to the couch, where someone handed him a sheet to put over the body.	sobs without tears

threw himself face downward on the floor and broke into dry sobs.	oh, my God!.” He threw himself face downward on the floor and broke into dry sobs. The doctor had arrived, and Amory went over to the couch, where someone handed him a sheet to put over the body.	He threw himself face down on the floor and started to sob without tears.

went over to the couch, where someone handed him a sheet to put over the body.	He threw himself face downward on the floor and broke into dry sobs. The doctor had arrived, and Amory went over to the couch, where someone handed him a sheet to put over the body. With a sudden hardness, he raised one of the hands and let it fall back inertly.	walked to the couch, where someone gave him a sheet to cover the body.

a sudden hardness	The doctor had arrived, and Amory went over to the couch, where someone handed him a sheet to put over the body. With a sudden hardness, he raised one of the hands and let it fall back inertly. The brow was cold but the face not expressionless.	sudden coldness

raised one of the hands and let it fall back inertly.	The doctor had arrived, and Amory went over to the couch, where someone handed him a sheet to put over the body. With a sudden hardness, he raised one of the hands and let it fall back inertly. The brow was cold but the face not expressionless.	lifted one of the hands and let it drop lifelessly.

looked at the shoelaces—Dick had tied them that morning.	The brow was cold but the face not expressionless. He looked at the shoelaces—Dick had tied them that morning. He had tied them—and now he was this heavy white mass.	He looked at the shoelaces—Dick had tied them that morning.

the Dick Humbird	He had tied them—and now he was this heavy white mass. All that remained of the charm and personality of the Dick Humbird he had known—oh, it was all so horrible and unaristocratic and close to the earth. All tragedy has that strain of the grotesque and squalid—so useless, futile.	Dick Humbird

charm and personality of the Dick Humbird he had known—oh, it was all so horrible and unaristocratic and close to the earth.	He had tied them—and now he was this heavy white mass. All that remained of the charm and personality of the Dick Humbird he had known—oh, it was all so horrible and unaristocratic and close to the earth. All tragedy has that strain of the grotesque and squalid—so useless, futile.	The charming, lively Dick Humbird he knew was gone—it was all so awful, low-class, and down to earth.

strain of the grotesque and squalid—so useless, futile.	All that remained of the charm and personality of the Dick Humbird he had known—oh, it was all so horrible and unaristocratic and close to the earth. All tragedy has that strain of the grotesque and squalid—so useless, futile. the way animals die.	a touch of the bizarre and dirty—so pointless, hopeless.

mangled in some alley of his childhood.	the way animals die. Amory was reminded of a cat that had lain horribly mangled in some alley of his childhood. “Someone go to Princeton with Ferrenby.”	badly injured in an alley when he was a kid.

go to Princeton with Ferrenby.”	Amory was reminded of a cat that had lain horribly mangled in some alley of his childhood. “Someone go to Princeton with Ferrenby.” Amory stepped outside the door and shivered slightly at the late night wind—a wind that stirred a broken fender on the mass of bent metal to a plaintive, tinny sound.	Someone be Ferrenby's classmate at Princeton.

a broken fender	“Someone go to Princeton with Ferrenby.” Amory stepped outside the door and shivered slightly at the late night wind—a wind that stirred a broken fender on the mass of bent metal to a plaintive, tinny sound.	a damaged car fender

wind that stirred a broken fender on the mass of bent metal to a plaintive, tinny sound.	“Someone go to Princeton with Ferrenby.” Amory stepped outside the door and shivered slightly at the late night wind—a wind that stirred a broken fender on the mass of bent metal to a plaintive, tinny sound.	wind made a broken fender on the wrecked car make a sad, metallic noise.

a plaintive, tinny sound	“Someone go to Princeton with Ferrenby.” Amory stepped outside the door and shivered slightly at the late night wind—a wind that stirred a broken fender on the mass of bent metal to a plaintive, tinny sound.	a sad, metallic sound

a merciful chance	Next day, by a merciful chance, passed in a whirl. When Amory was by himself his thoughts zigzagged inevitably to the picture of that red mouth yawning incongruously in the white face, but with a determined effort he piled present excitement upon the memory of it and shut it coldly away from his mind.	lucky break

passed in a whirl.	Next day, by a merciful chance, passed in a whirl. When Amory was by himself his thoughts zigzagged inevitably to the picture of that red mouth yawning incongruously in the white face, but with a determined effort he piled present excitement upon the memory of it and shut it coldly away from his mind.	passed quickly and busily.

effort he piled present excitement upon the memory of it and shut it coldly away from his mind.	Next day, by a merciful chance, passed in a whirl. When Amory was by himself his thoughts zigzagged inevitably to the picture of that red mouth yawning incongruously in the white face, but with a determined effort he piled present excitement upon the memory of it and shut it coldly away from his mind. Isabelle and her mother drove into town at four, and they rode up smiling Prospect Avenue, through the gay crowd, to have tea at Cottage.	he focused on the excitement of the moment to push the memory away and ignore it.

smiling Prospect Avenue, through the gay crowd, to have tea at Cottage.	When Amory was by himself his thoughts zigzagged inevitably to the picture of that red mouth yawning incongruously in the white face, but with a determined effort he piled present excitement upon the memory of it and shut it coldly away from his mind. Isabelle and her mother drove into town at four, and they rode up smiling Prospect Avenue, through the gay crowd, to have tea at Cottage. The clubs had their annual dinners that night, so at seven he loaned her to a freshman and arranged to meet her in the gymnasium at eleven, when the upper classmen were admitted to the freshman dance.	smiling Prospect Avenue, through the lively crowd, to have tea at Cottage.

the upper classmen	Isabelle and her mother drove into town at four, and they rode up smiling Prospect Avenue, through the gay crowd, to have tea at Cottage. The clubs had their annual dinners that night, so at seven he loaned her to a freshman and arranged to meet her in the gymnasium at eleven, when the upper classmen were admitted to the freshman dance. She was all he had expected, and he was happy and eager to make that night the centre of every dream.	the older students

admitted to the freshman dance.	Isabelle and her mother drove into town at four, and they rode up smiling Prospect Avenue, through the gay crowd, to have tea at Cottage. The clubs had their annual dinners that night, so at seven he loaned her to a freshman and arranged to meet her in the gymnasium at eleven, when the upper classmen were admitted to the freshman dance. She was all he had expected, and he was happy and eager to make that night the centre of every dream.	allowed into the freshman dance.

the freshman dance	Isabelle and her mother drove into town at four, and they rode up smiling Prospect Avenue, through the gay crowd, to have tea at Cottage. The clubs had their annual dinners that night, so at seven he loaned her to a freshman and arranged to meet her in the gymnasium at eleven, when the upper classmen were admitted to the freshman dance. She was all he had expected, and he was happy and eager to make that night the centre of every dream.	the freshman dance

the freshman torchlight parade	She was all he had expected, and he was happy and eager to make that night the centre of every dream. At nine the upper classes stood in front of the clubs as the freshman torchlight parade rioted past, and Amory wondered if the dress-suited groups against the dark, stately backgrounds and under the flare of the torches made the night as brilliant to the staring, cheering freshmen as it had been to him the year before. The next day was another whirl.	The parade of new students with torches.

stood in front of the clubs as the freshman torchlight parade rioted past, and Amory wondered if the dress-suited groups against the dark, stately backgrounds and under the flare of the torches made the night as brilliant to the staring, cheering freshmen as it had been to him the year before.	She was all he had expected, and he was happy and eager to make that night the centre of every dream. At nine the upper classes stood in front of the clubs as the freshman torchlight parade rioted past, and Amory wondered if the dress-suited groups against the dark, stately backgrounds and under the flare of the torches made the night as brilliant to the staring, cheering freshmen as it had been to him the year before. The next day was another whirl.	were standing outside the clubs watching the wild freshman torchlight parade go by, and Amory wondered if the elegantly dressed people set against the dark, impressive buildings and lit by the torches made the night as exciting for the new students as it had been for him the previous year.

the dark, stately backgrounds	She was all he had expected, and he was happy and eager to make that night the centre of every dream. At nine the upper classes stood in front of the clubs as the freshman torchlight parade rioted past, and Amory wondered if the dress-suited groups against the dark, stately backgrounds and under the flare of the torches made the night as brilliant to the staring, cheering freshmen as it had been to him the year before. The next day was another whirl.	the dark, impressive buildings

cheering freshmen	She was all he had expected, and he was happy and eager to make that night the centre of every dream. At nine the upper classes stood in front of the clubs as the freshman torchlight parade rioted past, and Amory wondered if the dress-suited groups against the dark, stately backgrounds and under the flare of the torches made the night as brilliant to the staring, cheering freshmen as it had been to him the year before. The next day was another whirl.	enthusiastic first-year students

the fried chicken	The next day was another whirl. They lunched in a gay party of six in a private dining-room at the club, while Isabelle and Amory looked at each other tenderly over the fried chicken and knew that their love was to be eternal. They danced away the prom until five, and the stags cut in on Isabelle with joyous abandon, which grew more and more enthusiastic as the hour grew late, and their wines, stored in overcoat pockets in the coat room, made old weariness wait until another day.	the fried chicken

looked at each other tenderly over the fried chicken and knew that their love was to be eternal.	The next day was another whirl. They lunched in a gay party of six in a private dining-room at the club, while Isabelle and Amory looked at each other tenderly over the fried chicken and knew that their love was to be eternal. They danced away the prom until five, and the stags cut in on Isabelle with joyous abandon, which grew more and more enthusiastic as the hour grew late, and their wines, stored in overcoat pockets in the coat room, made old weariness wait until another day.	gazed lovingly at each other while eating fried chicken, certain their love would last forever.

cut in on Isabelle with joyous abandon, which grew more and more enthusiastic as the hour grew late, and their wines, stored in overcoat pockets in the coat room, made old weariness wait until another day.	They lunched in a gay party of six in a private dining-room at the club, while Isabelle and Amory looked at each other tenderly over the fried chicken and knew that their love was to be eternal. They danced away the prom until five, and the stags cut in on Isabelle with joyous abandon, which grew more and more enthusiastic as the hour grew late, and their wines, stored in overcoat pockets in the coat room, made old weariness wait until another day. The stag line is a most homogeneous mass of men.	enthusiastically cut in on Isabelle while she was dancing, especially as the night went on, and the alcohol they snuck in made them forget how tired they were.

overcoat pockets	They lunched in a gay party of six in a private dining-room at the club, while Isabelle and Amory looked at each other tenderly over the fried chicken and knew that their love was to be eternal. They danced away the prom until five, and the stags cut in on Isabelle with joyous abandon, which grew more and more enthusiastic as the hour grew late, and their wines, stored in overcoat pockets in the coat room, made old weariness wait until another day. The stag line is a most homogeneous mass of men.	coat pockets

joyous abandon	They lunched in a gay party of six in a private dining-room at the club, while Isabelle and Amory looked at each other tenderly over the fried chicken and knew that their love was to be eternal. They danced away the prom until five, and the stags cut in on Isabelle with joyous abandon, which grew more and more enthusiastic as the hour grew late, and their wines, stored in overcoat pockets in the coat room, made old weariness wait until another day. The stag line is a most homogeneous mass of men.	carefree joy

old weariness	They lunched in a gay party of six in a private dining-room at the club, while Isabelle and Amory looked at each other tenderly over the fried chicken and knew that their love was to be eternal. They danced away the prom until five, and the stags cut in on Isabelle with joyous abandon, which grew more and more enthusiastic as the hour grew late, and their wines, stored in overcoat pockets in the coat room, made old weariness wait until another day. The stag line is a most homogeneous mass of men.	being tired

a most homogeneous mass	They danced away the prom until five, and the stags cut in on Isabelle with joyous abandon, which grew more and more enthusiastic as the hour grew late, and their wines, stored in overcoat pockets in the coat room, made old weariness wait until another day. The stag line is a most homogeneous mass of men. It fairly sways with a single soul.	a very similar group

The stag line	They danced away the prom until five, and the stags cut in on Isabelle with joyous abandon, which grew more and more enthusiastic as the hour grew late, and their wines, stored in overcoat pockets in the coat room, made old weariness wait until another day. The stag line is a most homogeneous mass of men. It fairly sways with a single soul.	The group of men

sways with a single soul.	The stag line is a most homogeneous mass of men. It fairly sways with a single soul. A dark-haired beauty dances by and there is a half-gasping sound as the ripple surges forward and someone sleeker than the rest darts out and cuts in.	moves together as one.

A dark-haired beauty dances	It fairly sways with a single soul. A dark-haired beauty dances by and there is a half-gasping sound as the ripple surges forward and someone sleeker than the rest darts out and cuts in. Then when the six-foot girl (brought by Kaye in your class, and to whom he has been trying to introduce you all evening) gallops by, the line surges back and the groups face about and become intent on far corners of the hall, for Kaye, anxious and perspiring, appears elbowing through the crowd in search of familiar faces.	A dark-haired beauty dances.

surges forward and someone sleeker than the rest darts out and cuts in.	It fairly sways with a single soul. A dark-haired beauty dances by and there is a half-gasping sound as the ripple surges forward and someone sleeker than the rest darts out and cuts in. Then when the six-foot girl (brought by Kaye in your class, and to whom he has been trying to introduce you all evening) gallops by, the line surges back and the groups face about and become intent on far corners of the hall, for Kaye, anxious and perspiring, appears elbowing through the crowd in search of familiar faces.	moves ahead quickly, and someone smoother or more confident jumps in front of others to dance.

a half-gasping sound	It fairly sways with a single soul. A dark-haired beauty dances by and there is a half-gasping sound as the ripple surges forward and someone sleeker than the rest darts out and cuts in. Then when the six-foot girl (brought by Kaye in your class, and to whom he has been trying to introduce you all evening) gallops by, the line surges back and the groups face about and become intent on far corners of the hall, for Kaye, anxious and perspiring, appears elbowing through the crowd in search of familiar faces.	a little gasp

brought by Kaye in your class, and to whom he has been trying to introduce you all evening) gallops by, the line surges back and the groups face about and become intent on far corners of the hall, for Kaye, anxious and perspiring, appears elbowing through the crowd in search of familiar faces.	A dark-haired beauty dances by and there is a half-gasping sound as the ripple surges forward and someone sleeker than the rest darts out and cuts in. Then when the six-foot girl (brought by Kaye in your class, and to whom he has been trying to introduce you all evening) gallops by, the line surges back and the groups face about and become intent on far corners of the hall, for Kaye, anxious and perspiring, appears elbowing through the crowd in search of familiar faces. “I say, old man, I’ve got an awfully nice—” “Sorry, Kaye, but I’m set for this one.	Kaye brought her from your class and has been trying to introduce her to you all night. She dances past, and the line pulls back as people suddenly become fascinated with other parts of the room. Kaye, looking worried and sweaty, pushes through the crowd trying to find someone he knows.

cut in on a fella.”	“I say, old man, I’ve got an awfully nice—” “Sorry, Kaye, but I’m set for this one. I’ve got to cut in on a fella.” “Well, the next one?” “What—ah—er—I swear I’ve got to go cut in—look me up when she’s got a dance free.”	interrupt someone who's already dancing with her.

look me up when she’s got a dance free.”	I’ve got to cut in on a fella.” “Well, the next one?” “What—ah—er—I swear I’ve got to go cut in—look me up when she’s got a dance free.” It delighted Amory when Isabelle suggested that they leave for a while and drive around in her car.	Find me when she's available to dance.

drive around in her car.	“Well, the next one?” “What—ah—er—I swear I’ve got to go cut in—look me up when she’s got a dance free.” It delighted Amory when Isabelle suggested that they leave for a while and drive around in her car. For a delicious hour that passed too soon they glided the silent roads about Princeton and talked from the surface of their hearts in shy excitement.	go for a drive in her car.

shy excitement	It delighted Amory when Isabelle suggested that they leave for a while and drive around in her car. For a delicious hour that passed too soon they glided the silent roads about Princeton and talked from the surface of their hearts in shy excitement. Amory felt strangely ingenuous and made no attempt to kiss her.	shy excitement

surface of their hearts in shy excitement.	It delighted Amory when Isabelle suggested that they leave for a while and drive around in her car. For a delicious hour that passed too soon they glided the silent roads about Princeton and talked from the surface of their hearts in shy excitement. Amory felt strangely ingenuous and made no attempt to kiss her.	what they truly felt, with a nervous thrill.

play at which Isabelle wept all through the second act, rather to Amory’s embarrassment—though it filled him with tenderness to watch her.	Amory felt strangely ingenuous and made no attempt to kiss her. Next day they rode up through the Jersey country, had luncheon in New York, and in the afternoon went to see a problem play at which Isabelle wept all through the second act, rather to Amory’s embarrassment—though it filled him with tenderness to watch her. He was tempted to lean over and kiss away her tears, and she slipped her hand into his under cover of darkness to be pressed softly.	Isabelle cried during the entire second act of the play, which embarrassed Amory, but also made him feel tender towards her.

Amory’s embarrassment	Amory felt strangely ingenuous and made no attempt to kiss her. Next day they rode up through the Jersey country, had luncheon in New York, and in the afternoon went to see a problem play at which Isabelle wept all through the second act, rather to Amory’s embarrassment—though it filled him with tenderness to watch her. He was tempted to lean over and kiss away her tears, and she slipped her hand into his under cover of darkness to be pressed softly.	Amory felt awkward.

cover of darkness to be pressed softly.	Next day they rode up through the Jersey country, had luncheon in New York, and in the afternoon went to see a problem play at which Isabelle wept all through the second act, rather to Amory’s embarrassment—though it filled him with tenderness to watch her. He was tempted to lean over and kiss away her tears, and she slipped her hand into his under cover of darkness to be pressed softly. Then at six they arrived at the Borgés’ summer place on Long Island, and Amory rushed upstairs to change into a dinner coat.	in the darkness, so he could squeeze it gently.

the Borgés’ summer place	He was tempted to lean over and kiss away her tears, and she slipped her hand into his under cover of darkness to be pressed softly. Then at six they arrived at the Borgés’ summer place on Long Island, and Amory rushed upstairs to change into a dinner coat. As he put in his studs he realized that he was enjoying life as he would probably never enjoy it again.	The Borgés' summer house

arrived at the Borgés’ summer place on Long Island, and Amory rushed upstairs to change into a dinner coat.	He was tempted to lean over and kiss away her tears, and she slipped her hand into his under cover of darkness to be pressed softly. Then at six they arrived at the Borgés’ summer place on Long Island, and Amory rushed upstairs to change into a dinner coat. As he put in his studs he realized that he was enjoying life as he would probably never enjoy it again.	arrived at the Borgés’ summer house on Long Island, and Amory hurried upstairs to change into a tuxedo.

enjoying life as he would probably never enjoy it again.	Then at six they arrived at the Borgés’ summer place on Long Island, and Amory rushed upstairs to change into a dinner coat. As he put in his studs he realized that he was enjoying life as he would probably never enjoy it again. Everything was hallowed by the haze of his own youth.	enjoying life in a way he probably never would again.

haze of his own youth.	As he put in his studs he realized that he was enjoying life as he would probably never enjoy it again. Everything was hallowed by the haze of his own youth. He had arrived, abreast of the best in his generation at Princeton.	the glow of being young.

best in his generation at Princeton.	Everything was hallowed by the haze of his own youth. He had arrived, abreast of the best in his generation at Princeton. He was in love and his love was returned.	the top of his class at Princeton.

looked at himself in the mirror, trying to find in his own face the qualities that made him see clearer than the great crowd of people, that made him decide firmly, and able to influence and follow his own will.	He was in love and his love was returned. Turning on all the lights, he looked at himself in the mirror, trying to find in his own face the qualities that made him see clearer than the great crowd of people, that made him decide firmly, and able to influence and follow his own will. There was little in his life now that he would have changed.	He stared at himself in the mirror, searching for the qualities that made him see things differently, that made him decisive and able to control his own life.

waited at the top of the stairs, for he heard footsteps coming.	How conveniently well he looked, and how well a dinner coat became him. He stepped into the hall and then waited at the top of the stairs, for he heard footsteps coming. It was Isabelle, and from the top of her shining hair to her little golden slippers she had never seemed so beautiful.	waited at the top of the stairs because he heard footsteps approaching.

top of her shining hair to her little golden slippers she had never seemed so beautiful.	He stepped into the hall and then waited at the top of the stairs, for he heard footsteps coming. It was Isabelle, and from the top of her shining hair to her little golden slippers she had never seemed so beautiful. “Isabelle!”	She had never looked so beautiful, from her shining hair down to her golden slippers.

her little golden slippers	He stepped into the hall and then waited at the top of the stairs, for he heard footsteps coming. It was Isabelle, and from the top of her shining hair to her little golden slippers she had never seemed so beautiful. “Isabelle!”	her little golden slippers

his young egotism	he cried, half involuntarily, and held out his arms. As in the storybooks, she ran into them, and on that half-minute, as their lips first touched, rested the high point of vanity, the crest of his young egotism.	his youthful pride

rested the high point of vanity, the crest of his young egotism.	he cried, half involuntarily, and held out his arms. As in the storybooks, she ran into them, and on that half-minute, as their lips first touched, rested the high point of vanity, the crest of his young egotism.	was the peak of his pride and youthful arrogance.

spot about the size of a pea marred its pallor.	“Your shirt stud—it hurt me—look!” She was looking down at her neck, where a little blue spot about the size of a pea marred its pallor. “Oh, Isabelle,” he reproached himself, “I’m a goopher.	a pea-sized spot spoiled its whiteness.

disappear in a second.”	he asked. “Oh—that spot; it’ll disappear in a second.” “It isn’t,” she said, after a moment of concentrated gazing, “it’s still there—and it looks like Old Nick—oh, Amory, what’ll we do!	disappear in a second."

’s still there—and it looks like Old Nick—oh, Amory, what’ll we do!	“Oh—that spot; it’ll disappear in a second.” “It isn’t,” she said, after a moment of concentrated gazing, “it’s still there—and it looks like Old Nick—oh, Amory, what’ll we do! It’s just the height of your shoulder.”	It's still there, and it looks like the devil! Oh, Amory, what are we going to do?

inclination to laugh.	It’s just the height of your shoulder.” “Massage it,” he suggested, repressing the faintest inclination to laugh. She rubbed it delicately with the tips of her fingers, and then a tear gathered in the corner of her eye, and slid down her cheek.	urge to laugh.

the faintest inclination	It’s just the height of your shoulder.” “Massage it,” he suggested, repressing the faintest inclination to laugh. She rubbed it delicately with the tips of her fingers, and then a tear gathered in the corner of her eye, and slid down her cheek.	the slightest urge

gathered in the corner of her eye, and slid down her cheek.	“Massage it,” he suggested, repressing the faintest inclination to laugh. She rubbed it delicately with the tips of her fingers, and then a tear gathered in the corner of her eye, and slid down her cheek. “Oh, Amory,” she said despairingly, lifting up a most pathetic face, “I’ll just make my whole neck flame if I rub it.	filled up in her eye and rolled down her face.

a most pathetic face	She rubbed it delicately with the tips of her fingers, and then a tear gathered in the corner of her eye, and slid down her cheek. “Oh, Amory,” she said despairingly, lifting up a most pathetic face, “I’ll just make my whole neck flame if I rub it. What’ll I do?”	a very sad face

make my whole neck flame if I rub it.	She rubbed it delicately with the tips of her fingers, and then a tear gathered in the corner of her eye, and slid down her cheek. “Oh, Amory,” she said despairingly, lifting up a most pathetic face, “I’ll just make my whole neck flame if I rub it. What’ll I do?”	my neck will get really red and irritated if I rub it.

sailed into his head and he couldn’t resist repeating it aloud.	What’ll I do?” A quotation sailed into his head and he couldn’t resist repeating it aloud. “All the perfumes of Arabia will not whiten this little hand.”	came to his mind, and he had to say it out loud.

perfumes of Arabia will not whiten this little hand.”	A quotation sailed into his head and he couldn’t resist repeating it aloud. “All the perfumes of Arabia will not whiten this little hand.” She looked up and the sparkle of the tear in her eye was like ice.	Nothing can erase this guilt.

sparkle of the tear in her eye was like ice.	“All the perfumes of Arabia will not whiten this little hand.” She looked up and the sparkle of the tear in her eye was like ice. “You’re not very sympathetic.”	The tear in her eye glittered like ice.

Isabelle, darling, I think it’ll—” “Don’t touch me!”	Amory mistook her meaning. “Isabelle, darling, I think it’ll—” “Don’t touch me!” she cried.	Isabelle, honey, I think it'll—” “Don’t touch me!”

sense of humor being—” She was looking at him with something that was not a smile, rather the faint, mirthless echo of a smile, in the corners of her mouth.	Then he slipped again. “Well, it is funny, Isabelle, and we were talking the other day about a sense of humor being—” She was looking at him with something that was not a smile, rather the faint, mirthless echo of a smile, in the corners of her mouth. “Oh, shut up!”	sense of humor being..." She looked at him, but it wasn't a real smile. It was more like a sad, fake smile playing at the corners of her mouth.

rather the faint, mirthless echo	Then he slipped again. “Well, it is funny, Isabelle, and we were talking the other day about a sense of humor being—” She was looking at him with something that was not a smile, rather the faint, mirthless echo of a smile, in the corners of her mouth. “Oh, shut up!”	more like a weak, humorless imitation

fled down the hallway toward her room.	“Oh, shut up!” she cried suddenly, and fled down the hallway toward her room. Amory stood there, covered with remorseful confusion.	ran down the hallway to her room.

covered with remorseful confusion.	she cried suddenly, and fled down the hallway toward her room. Amory stood there, covered with remorseful confusion. “Damn!”	filled with regret and bewilderment.

remorseful confusion	she cried suddenly, and fled down the hallway toward her room. Amory stood there, covered with remorseful confusion. “Damn!”	guilty and confused

wrap about her shoulders, and they descended the stairs in a silence that endured through dinner.	“Damn!” When Isabelle reappeared she had thrown a light wrap about her shoulders, and they descended the stairs in a silence that endured through dinner. “Isabelle,” he began rather testily, as they arranged themselves in the car, bound for a dance at the Greenwich Country Club, “you’re angry, and I’ll be, too, in a minute.	She put a wrap around her shoulders, and they went downstairs in silence, which lasted throughout dinner.

be, too, in a minute.	When Isabelle reappeared she had thrown a light wrap about her shoulders, and they descended the stairs in a silence that endured through dinner. “Isabelle,” he began rather testily, as they arranged themselves in the car, bound for a dance at the Greenwich Country Club, “you’re angry, and I’ll be, too, in a minute. Let’s kiss and make up.”	I'll be angry soon, too.

the Greenwich Country Club	When Isabelle reappeared she had thrown a light wrap about her shoulders, and they descended the stairs in a silence that endured through dinner. “Isabelle,” he began rather testily, as they arranged themselves in the car, bound for a dance at the Greenwich Country Club, “you’re angry, and I’ll be, too, in a minute. Let’s kiss and make up.”	the Greenwich Country Club

kept his temper with difficulty.	“I’ll be anything I want.” Amory kept his temper with difficulty. He became aware that he had not an ounce of real affection for Isabelle, but her coldness piqued him.	barely managed to stay calm.

real affection	Amory kept his temper with difficulty. He became aware that he had not an ounce of real affection for Isabelle, but her coldness piqued him. He wanted to kiss her, kiss her a lot, because then he knew he could leave in the morning and not care.	genuine love

affection for Isabelle, but her coldness piqued him.	Amory kept his temper with difficulty. He became aware that he had not an ounce of real affection for Isabelle, but her coldness piqued him. He wanted to kiss her, kiss her a lot, because then he knew he could leave in the morning and not care.	affection for Isabelle, but her coldness annoyed him.

wanted to kiss her, kiss her a lot, because then he knew he could leave in the morning and not care.	He became aware that he had not an ounce of real affection for Isabelle, but her coldness piqued him. He wanted to kiss her, kiss her a lot, because then he knew he could leave in the morning and not care. On the contrary, if he didn’t kiss her, it would worry him.	He wanted to kiss her desperately because then he could leave in the morning without regrets.

interfere vaguely with his idea of himself as a conqueror.	On the contrary, if he didn’t kiss her, it would worry him. It would interfere vaguely with his idea of himself as a conqueror. It wasn’t dignified to come off second best, pleading, with a doughty warrior like Isabelle.	mess with his image of himself as someone who always wins.

a doughty warrior	It would interfere vaguely with his idea of himself as a conqueror. It wasn’t dignified to come off second best, pleading, with a doughty warrior like Isabelle. Perhaps she suspected this.	a strong warrior

pleading, with a doughty warrior like Isabelle.	It would interfere vaguely with his idea of himself as a conqueror. It wasn’t dignified to come off second best, pleading, with a doughty warrior like Isabelle. Perhaps she suspected this.	begging with a strong fighter like Isabelle.

great moths	Perhaps she suspected this. At any rate, Amory watched the night that should have been the consummation of romance glide by with great moths overhead and the heavy fragrance of roadside gardens, but without those broken words, those little sighs. Afterward they suppered on ginger ale and devil’s food in the pantry, and Amory announced a decision.	big moths

roadside gardens	Perhaps she suspected this. At any rate, Amory watched the night that should have been the consummation of romance glide by with great moths overhead and the heavy fragrance of roadside gardens, but without those broken words, those little sighs. Afterward they suppered on ginger ale and devil’s food in the pantry, and Amory announced a decision.	gardens by the road

night that should have been the consummation of romance glide by with great moths overhead and the heavy fragrance of roadside gardens, but without those broken words, those little sighs.	Perhaps she suspected this. At any rate, Amory watched the night that should have been the consummation of romance glide by with great moths overhead and the heavy fragrance of roadside gardens, but without those broken words, those little sighs. Afterward they suppered on ginger ale and devil’s food in the pantry, and Amory announced a decision.	the romantic night passed without whispered words or sighs, just moths flying around and the strong smell of flowers from nearby gardens.

food in the pantry, and Amory announced a decision.	At any rate, Amory watched the night that should have been the consummation of romance glide by with great moths overhead and the heavy fragrance of roadside gardens, but without those broken words, those little sighs. Afterward they suppered on ginger ale and devil’s food in the pantry, and Amory announced a decision. “I’m leaving early in the morning.”	food in the pantry, and Amory announced a decision.

devil’s food	At any rate, Amory watched the night that should have been the consummation of romance glide by with great moths overhead and the heavy fragrance of roadside gardens, but without those broken words, those little sighs. Afterward they suppered on ginger ale and devil’s food in the pantry, and Amory announced a decision. “I’m leaving early in the morning.”	chocolate cake

ginger ale	At any rate, Amory watched the night that should have been the consummation of romance glide by with great moths overhead and the heavy fragrance of roadside gardens, but without those broken words, those little sighs. Afterward they suppered on ginger ale and devil’s food in the pantry, and Amory announced a decision. “I’m leaving early in the morning.”	ginger ale

put it that way,” he objected.	“However, I’m going.” “Well, if you insist on being ridiculous—” “Oh, don’t put it that way,” he objected. “—just because I won’t let you kiss me.	Don't say it like that," he protested.

isn’t as if you were refusing on moral grounds.”	We’ve reached the stage where we either ought to kiss—or—or—nothing. It isn’t as if you were refusing on moral grounds.” She hesitated.	It's not like you're refusing because of morals."

think about you,” she began, in a feeble, perverse attempt at conciliation.	She hesitated. “I really don’t know what to think about you,” she began, in a feeble, perverse attempt at conciliation. “You’re so funny.”	think about you," she started, trying weakly and strangely to be nice.

a feeble, perverse attempt	She hesitated. “I really don’t know what to think about you,” she began, in a feeble, perverse attempt at conciliation. “You’re so funny.”	a weak, twisted effort

world, the way you talk!	“At Princeton—” “Oh, you and Princeton! You’d think that was the world, the way you talk! Perhaps you can write better than anybody else on your old Princetonian; maybe the freshmen do think you’re important—” “You don’t understand—” “Yes, I do,” she interrupted.	the world, the way you talk!

anybody else on your old Princetonian; maybe the freshmen do think you’re important—” “You don’t understand—” “Yes, I do,” she interrupted.	You’d think that was the world, the way you talk! Perhaps you can write better than anybody else on your old Princetonian; maybe the freshmen do think you’re important—” “You don’t understand—” “Yes, I do,” she interrupted. “I do, because you’re always talking about yourself and I used to like it; now I don’t.”	anyone else at your old Princeton club; maybe the freshmen do think you're important." "You don't understand." "Yes, I do," she interrupted.

your old Princetonian	You’d think that was the world, the way you talk! Perhaps you can write better than anybody else on your old Princetonian; maybe the freshmen do think you’re important—” “You don’t understand—” “Yes, I do,” she interrupted. “I do, because you’re always talking about yourself and I used to like it; now I don’t.”	your old Princeton magazine

do, because you’re always talking about yourself and I used to like it; now I don’t.”	Perhaps you can write better than anybody else on your old Princetonian; maybe the freshmen do think you’re important—” “You don’t understand—” “Yes, I do,” she interrupted. “I do, because you’re always talking about yourself and I used to like it; now I don’t.” “Have I tonight?”	Yes, I do, because you're always talking about yourself, and I used to enjoy that, but now I don't.

talking to you—you’re so critical.”	You just sat and watched my eyes. Besides, I have to think all the time I’m talking to you—you’re so critical.” “I make you think, do I?”	talking to you because you're so judgmental."

touch of vanity.	“I make you think, do I?” Amory repeated with a touch of vanity. “You’re a nervous strain”—this emphatically—“and when you analyze every little emotion and instinct I just don’t have ’em.”	A bit conceited.

have ’em.”	Amory repeated with a touch of vanity. “You’re a nervous strain”—this emphatically—“and when you analyze every little emotion and instinct I just don’t have ’em.” “I know.”	I don't have them.

every little emotion	Amory repeated with a touch of vanity. “You’re a nervous strain”—this emphatically—“and when you analyze every little emotion and instinct I just don’t have ’em.” “I know.”	every small feeling

foot of the stairs.	She stood up. He rose abstractedly and they walked to the foot of the stairs. “What train can I get?”	bottom of the stairs.

’s one about 9:11 if you really must go.”	“What train can I get?” “There’s one about 9:11 if you really must go.” “Yes, I’ve got to go, really.	There's one at about 9:11 if you really have to go.

head of the stairs, and as Amory turned into his room he thought he caught just the faintest cloud of discontent in her face.	“Good night.” They were at the head of the stairs, and as Amory turned into his room he thought he caught just the faintest cloud of discontent in her face. He lay awake in the darkness and wondered how much he cared—how much of his sudden unhappiness was hurt vanity—whether he was, after all, temperamentally unfitted for romance.	top of the stairs, and as Amory went into his room he thought he saw a hint of unhappiness on her face.

just the faintest cloud	“Good night.” They were at the head of the stairs, and as Amory turned into his room he thought he caught just the faintest cloud of discontent in her face. He lay awake in the darkness and wondered how much he cared—how much of his sudden unhappiness was hurt vanity—whether he was, after all, temperamentally unfitted for romance.	the slightest hint

his sudden unhappiness	They were at the head of the stairs, and as Amory turned into his room he thought he caught just the faintest cloud of discontent in her face. He lay awake in the darkness and wondered how much he cared—how much of his sudden unhappiness was hurt vanity—whether he was, after all, temperamentally unfitted for romance. When he awoke, it was with a glad flood of consciousness.	why he suddenly felt so unhappy

unfitted for romance.	They were at the head of the stairs, and as Amory turned into his room he thought he caught just the faintest cloud of discontent in her face. He lay awake in the darkness and wondered how much he cared—how much of his sudden unhappiness was hurt vanity—whether he was, after all, temperamentally unfitted for romance. When he awoke, it was with a glad flood of consciousness.	not made for love.

the chintz curtains	When he awoke, it was with a glad flood of consciousness. The early wind stirred the chintz curtains at the windows and he was idly puzzled not to be in his room at Princeton with his school football picture over the bureau and the Triangle Club on the wall opposite. Then the grandfather’s clock in the hall outside struck eight, and the memory of the night before came to him.	the patterned cotton curtains

picture over the bureau and the Triangle Club on the wall opposite.	When he awoke, it was with a glad flood of consciousness. The early wind stirred the chintz curtains at the windows and he was idly puzzled not to be in his room at Princeton with his school football picture over the bureau and the Triangle Club on the wall opposite. Then the grandfather’s clock in the hall outside struck eight, and the memory of the night before came to him.	picture above his dresser and the Triangle Club poster on the opposite wall.

the grandfather’s clock	The early wind stirred the chintz curtains at the windows and he was idly puzzled not to be in his room at Princeton with his school football picture over the bureau and the Triangle Club on the wall opposite. Then the grandfather’s clock in the hall outside struck eight, and the memory of the night before came to him. He was out of bed, dressing, like the wind; he must get out of the house before he saw Isabelle.	the grandfather's clock

dressing, like the wind; he must get out of the house before he saw Isabelle.	Then the grandfather’s clock in the hall outside struck eight, and the memory of the night before came to him. He was out of bed, dressing, like the wind; he must get out of the house before he saw Isabelle. What had seemed a melancholy happening, now seemed a tiresome anticlimax.	dressing quickly; he had to leave before he saw Isabelle.

a melancholy happening	He was out of bed, dressing, like the wind; he must get out of the house before he saw Isabelle. What had seemed a melancholy happening, now seemed a tiresome anticlimax. He was dressed at half past, so he sat down by the window; felt that the sinews of his heart were twisted somewhat more than he had thought.	a sad event

seemed a tiresome anticlimax.	He was out of bed, dressing, like the wind; he must get out of the house before he saw Isabelle. What had seemed a melancholy happening, now seemed a tiresome anticlimax. He was dressed at half past, so he sat down by the window; felt that the sinews of his heart were twisted somewhat more than he had thought.	felt like a disappointing letdown.

a tiresome anticlimax	He was out of bed, dressing, like the wind; he must get out of the house before he saw Isabelle. What had seemed a melancholy happening, now seemed a tiresome anticlimax. He was dressed at half past, so he sat down by the window; felt that the sinews of his heart were twisted somewhat more than he had thought.	an annoying letdown

dressed at half past, so he sat down by the window; felt that the sinews of his heart were twisted somewhat more than he had thought.	What had seemed a melancholy happening, now seemed a tiresome anticlimax. He was dressed at half past, so he sat down by the window; felt that the sinews of his heart were twisted somewhat more than he had thought. What an ironic mockery the morning seemed!—bright and sunny, and full of the smell of the garden; hearing Mrs. Borgé’s voice in the sun-parlor below, he wondered where was Isabelle.	He was dressed by half past, so he sat by the window and felt his heart was hurting more than he realized.

Mrs. Borgé’s voice	He was dressed at half past, so he sat down by the window; felt that the sinews of his heart were twisted somewhat more than he had thought. What an ironic mockery the morning seemed!—bright and sunny, and full of the smell of the garden; hearing Mrs. Borgé’s voice in the sun-parlor below, he wondered where was Isabelle. There was a knock at the door.	Mrs. Borgé's voice

voice in the sun-parlor below, he wondered where was Isabelle.	He was dressed at half past, so he sat down by the window; felt that the sinews of his heart were twisted somewhat more than he had thought. What an ironic mockery the morning seemed!—bright and sunny, and full of the smell of the garden; hearing Mrs. Borgé’s voice in the sun-parlor below, he wondered where was Isabelle. There was a knock at the door.	hearing Mrs. Borgé's voice downstairs, he wondered where Isabelle was.

Browning, which he had once quoted to Isabelle in a letter: “Each life unfulfilled, you see, It hangs still, patchy and scrappy; We have not sighed deep, laughed free, Starved, feasted, despaired—been happy.”	“The car will be around at ten minutes of nine, sir.” He returned to his contemplation of the outdoors, and began repeating over and over, mechanically, a verse from Browning, which he had once quoted to Isabelle in a letter: “Each life unfulfilled, you see, It hangs still, patchy and scrappy; We have not sighed deep, laughed free, Starved, feasted, despaired—been happy.” But his life would not be unfulfilled.	"Each life that isn't fully lived, you see, remains incomplete and messy. We haven't truly felt sadness, laughed freely, been hungry, indulged, despaired, or been happy."

read into her; that this was her high point, that no one else would ever make her think.	But his life would not be unfulfilled. He took a sombre satisfaction in thinking that perhaps all along she had been nothing except what he had read into her; that this was her high point, that no one else would ever make her think. Yet that was what she had objected to in him; and Amory was suddenly tired of thinking, thinking!	projected onto her; that this was the best she would ever be, that no one else would ever inspire her.

a sombre satisfaction	But his life would not be unfulfilled. He took a sombre satisfaction in thinking that perhaps all along she had been nothing except what he had read into her; that this was her high point, that no one else would ever make her think. Yet that was what she had objected to in him; and Amory was suddenly tired of thinking, thinking!	a dark kind of satisfaction

a dusty day	On a dusty day in September Amory arrived in Princeton and joined the sweltering crowd of conditioned men who thronged the streets. It seemed a stupid way to commence his upper-class years, to spend four hours a morning in the stuffy room of a tutoring school, imbibing the infinite boredom of conic sections.	a dusty day

the sweltering crowd	On a dusty day in September Amory arrived in Princeton and joined the sweltering crowd of conditioned men who thronged the streets. It seemed a stupid way to commence his upper-class years, to spend four hours a morning in the stuffy room of a tutoring school, imbibing the infinite boredom of conic sections.	the hot, sweaty crowd

men who thronged the streets.	On a dusty day in September Amory arrived in Princeton and joined the sweltering crowd of conditioned men who thronged the streets. It seemed a stupid way to commence his upper-class years, to spend four hours a morning in the stuffy room of a tutoring school, imbibing the infinite boredom of conic sections.	men who crowded the streets.

the stuffy room	On a dusty day in September Amory arrived in Princeton and joined the sweltering crowd of conditioned men who thronged the streets. It seemed a stupid way to commence his upper-class years, to spend four hours a morning in the stuffy room of a tutoring school, imbibing the infinite boredom of conic sections. Mr. Rooney, pander to the dull, conducted the class and smoked innumerable Pall Malls as he drew diagrams and worked equations from six in the morning until midnight.	the stuffy room

a tutoring school	On a dusty day in September Amory arrived in Princeton and joined the sweltering crowd of conditioned men who thronged the streets. It seemed a stupid way to commence his upper-class years, to spend four hours a morning in the stuffy room of a tutoring school, imbibing the infinite boredom of conic sections. Mr. Rooney, pander to the dull, conducted the class and smoked innumerable Pall Malls as he drew diagrams and worked equations from six in the morning until midnight.	a prep school

the infinite boredom	On a dusty day in September Amory arrived in Princeton and joined the sweltering crowd of conditioned men who thronged the streets. It seemed a stupid way to commence his upper-class years, to spend four hours a morning in the stuffy room of a tutoring school, imbibing the infinite boredom of conic sections. Mr. Rooney, pander to the dull, conducted the class and smoked innumerable Pall Malls as he drew diagrams and worked equations from six in the morning until midnight.	endless boredom

seemed a stupid way to commence his upper-class years, to spend four hours a morning in the stuffy room of a tutoring school, imbibing the infinite boredom of conic sections.	On a dusty day in September Amory arrived in Princeton and joined the sweltering crowd of conditioned men who thronged the streets. It seemed a stupid way to commence his upper-class years, to spend four hours a morning in the stuffy room of a tutoring school, imbibing the infinite boredom of conic sections. Mr. Rooney, pander to the dull, conducted the class and smoked innumerable Pall Malls as he drew diagrams and worked equations from six in the morning until midnight.	It seemed like a dumb way to start his junior year, spending four hours every morning in a stuffy tutoring school, soaking up the endless boredom of studying conic sections.

conic sections	On a dusty day in September Amory arrived in Princeton and joined the sweltering crowd of conditioned men who thronged the streets. It seemed a stupid way to commence his upper-class years, to spend four hours a morning in the stuffy room of a tutoring school, imbibing the infinite boredom of conic sections. Mr. Rooney, pander to the dull, conducted the class and smoked innumerable Pall Malls as he drew diagrams and worked equations from six in the morning until midnight.	geometry involving cones

drew diagrams and worked equations from six in the morning until midnight.	It seemed a stupid way to commence his upper-class years, to spend four hours a morning in the stuffy room of a tutoring school, imbibing the infinite boredom of conic sections. Mr. Rooney, pander to the dull, conducted the class and smoked innumerable Pall Malls as he drew diagrams and worked equations from six in the morning until midnight. “Now, Langueduc, if I used that formula, where would my A point be?”	drawing diagrams and solving equations from six in the morning until midnight.

innumerable Pall Malls	It seemed a stupid way to commence his upper-class years, to spend four hours a morning in the stuffy room of a tutoring school, imbibing the infinite boredom of conic sections. Mr. Rooney, pander to the dull, conducted the class and smoked innumerable Pall Malls as he drew diagrams and worked equations from six in the morning until midnight. “Now, Langueduc, if I used that formula, where would my A point be?”	countless Pall Mall cigarettes

three of football material and tries to concentrate.	“Now, Langueduc, if I used that formula, where would my A point be?” Langueduc lazily shifts his six-foot-three of football material and tries to concentrate. “Oh—ah—I’m damned if I know, Mr. Rooney.”	three of football player and tries to focus.

damned if I know, Mr. Rooney.”	Langueduc lazily shifts his six-foot-three of football material and tries to concentrate. “Oh—ah—I’m damned if I know, Mr. Rooney.” “Oh, why of course, of course you can’t use that formula.	I have no idea, Mr. Rooney.

wish you’d go over that again.”	I’m here to show you.” “Well, Mr. Rooney, if you don’t mind, I wish you’d go over that again.” “Gladly.	Please explain that again.

all these prominent athletes	Now here’s ‘A’.” The room was a study in stupidity—two huge stands for paper, Mr. Rooney in his shirtsleeves in front of them, and slouched around on chairs, a dozen men: Fred Sloane, the pitcher, who absolutely had to get eligible; “Slim” Langueduc, who would beat Yale this fall, if only he could master a poor fifty percent; McDowell, gay young sophomore, who thought it was quite a sporting thing to be tutoring here with all these prominent athletes. “Those poor birds who haven’t a cent to tutor, and have to study during the term are the ones I pity,” he announced to Amory one day, with a flaccid camaraderie in the droop of the cigarette from his pale lips.	all these famous athletes

; “Slim” Langueduc	Now here’s ‘A’.” The room was a study in stupidity—two huge stands for paper, Mr. Rooney in his shirtsleeves in front of them, and slouched around on chairs, a dozen men: Fred Sloane, the pitcher, who absolutely had to get eligible; “Slim” Langueduc, who would beat Yale this fall, if only he could master a poor fifty percent; McDowell, gay young sophomore, who thought it was quite a sporting thing to be tutoring here with all these prominent athletes. “Those poor birds who haven’t a cent to tutor, and have to study during the term are the ones I pity,” he announced to Amory one day, with a flaccid camaraderie in the droop of the cigarette from his pale lips.	; "Slim" Langueduc

gay young sophomore	Now here’s ‘A’.” The room was a study in stupidity—two huge stands for paper, Mr. Rooney in his shirtsleeves in front of them, and slouched around on chairs, a dozen men: Fred Sloane, the pitcher, who absolutely had to get eligible; “Slim” Langueduc, who would beat Yale this fall, if only he could master a poor fifty percent; McDowell, gay young sophomore, who thought it was quite a sporting thing to be tutoring here with all these prominent athletes. “Those poor birds who haven’t a cent to tutor, and have to study during the term are the ones I pity,” he announced to Amory one day, with a flaccid camaraderie in the droop of the cigarette from his pale lips.	happy young sophomore

McDowell, gay young sophomore, who thought it was quite a sporting thing to be tutoring here with all these prominent athletes.	Now here’s ‘A’.” The room was a study in stupidity—two huge stands for paper, Mr. Rooney in his shirtsleeves in front of them, and slouched around on chairs, a dozen men: Fred Sloane, the pitcher, who absolutely had to get eligible; “Slim” Langueduc, who would beat Yale this fall, if only he could master a poor fifty percent; McDowell, gay young sophomore, who thought it was quite a sporting thing to be tutoring here with all these prominent athletes. “Those poor birds who haven’t a cent to tutor, and have to study during the term are the ones I pity,” he announced to Amory one day, with a flaccid camaraderie in the droop of the cigarette from his pale lips.	McDowell, a cheerful sophomore, thought it was exciting to tutor these famous athletes.

a flaccid camaraderie	The room was a study in stupidity—two huge stands for paper, Mr. Rooney in his shirtsleeves in front of them, and slouched around on chairs, a dozen men: Fred Sloane, the pitcher, who absolutely had to get eligible; “Slim” Langueduc, who would beat Yale this fall, if only he could master a poor fifty percent; McDowell, gay young sophomore, who thought it was quite a sporting thing to be tutoring here with all these prominent athletes. “Those poor birds who haven’t a cent to tutor, and have to study during the term are the ones I pity,” he announced to Amory one day, with a flaccid camaraderie in the droop of the cigarette from his pale lips. “I should think it would be such a bore, there’s so much else to do in New York during the term.	a weak sense of friendship

birds who haven’t a cent to tutor, and have to study during the term are the ones I pity,” he announced to Amory one day, with a flaccid camaraderie in the droop of the cigarette from his pale lips.	The room was a study in stupidity—two huge stands for paper, Mr. Rooney in his shirtsleeves in front of them, and slouched around on chairs, a dozen men: Fred Sloane, the pitcher, who absolutely had to get eligible; “Slim” Langueduc, who would beat Yale this fall, if only he could master a poor fifty percent; McDowell, gay young sophomore, who thought it was quite a sporting thing to be tutoring here with all these prominent athletes. “Those poor birds who haven’t a cent to tutor, and have to study during the term are the ones I pity,” he announced to Amory one day, with a flaccid camaraderie in the droop of the cigarette from his pale lips. “I should think it would be such a bore, there’s so much else to do in New York during the term.	I feel sorry for the guys who can't afford tutoring and have to study during the semester," he told Amory one day, with a weak, friendly gesture as his cigarette drooped from his pale lips.

such a bore	“Those poor birds who haven’t a cent to tutor, and have to study during the term are the ones I pity,” he announced to Amory one day, with a flaccid camaraderie in the droop of the cigarette from his pale lips. “I should think it would be such a bore, there’s so much else to do in New York during the term. I suppose they don’t know what they miss, anyhow.”	so boring

do in New York during the term.	“Those poor birds who haven’t a cent to tutor, and have to study during the term are the ones I pity,” he announced to Amory one day, with a flaccid camaraderie in the droop of the cigarette from his pale lips. “I should think it would be such a bore, there’s so much else to do in New York during the term. I suppose they don’t know what they miss, anyhow.”	to do in New York while school's in session.

air of “you and I” about Mr. McDowell that Amory very nearly pushed him out of the open window when he said this.	I suppose they don’t know what they miss, anyhow.” There was such an air of “you and I” about Mr. McDowell that Amory very nearly pushed him out of the open window when he said this. Next February his mother would wonder why he didn’t make a club and increase his allowance.	Mr. McDowell acted like he and Amory were special and superior, which made Amory want to throw him out the window.

dense earnestness	simple little nut. Through the smoke and the air of solemn, dense earnestness that filled the room would come the inevitable helpless cry: “I don’t get it! Repeat that, Mr. Rooney!”	serious intensity

the inevitable helpless cry	simple little nut. Through the smoke and the air of solemn, dense earnestness that filled the room would come the inevitable helpless cry: “I don’t get it! Repeat that, Mr. Rooney!”	the cry that always happened and couldn't be stopped

come the inevitable helpless cry: “I don’t get it!	simple little nut. Through the smoke and the air of solemn, dense earnestness that filled the room would come the inevitable helpless cry: “I don’t get it! Repeat that, Mr. Rooney!”	"Here comes the usual cry for help: 'I don't understand!'"

Most of them were so stupid or careless that they wouldn’t admit when they didn’t understand, and Amory was of the latter.	Repeat that, Mr. Rooney!” Most of them were so stupid or careless that they wouldn’t admit when they didn’t understand, and Amory was of the latter. He found it impossible to study conic sections; something in their calm and tantalizing respectability breathing defiantly through Mr. Rooney’s fetid parlors distorted their equations into insoluble anagrams.	Most of them were too dumb or lazy to admit they didn't understand, and Amory was one of those.

insoluble anagrams	Most of them were so stupid or careless that they wouldn’t admit when they didn’t understand, and Amory was of the latter. He found it impossible to study conic sections; something in their calm and tantalizing respectability breathing defiantly through Mr. Rooney’s fetid parlors distorted their equations into insoluble anagrams. He made a last night’s effort with the proverbial wet towel, and then blissfully took the exam, wondering unhappily why all the color and ambition of the spring before had faded out.	impossible to understand.

their calm and tantalizing respectability	Most of them were so stupid or careless that they wouldn’t admit when they didn’t understand, and Amory was of the latter. He found it impossible to study conic sections; something in their calm and tantalizing respectability breathing defiantly through Mr. Rooney’s fetid parlors distorted their equations into insoluble anagrams. He made a last night’s effort with the proverbial wet towel, and then blissfully took the exam, wondering unhappily why all the color and ambition of the spring before had faded out.	their boring but attractive correctness

Mr. Rooney’s fetid parlors	Most of them were so stupid or careless that they wouldn’t admit when they didn’t understand, and Amory was of the latter. He found it impossible to study conic sections; something in their calm and tantalizing respectability breathing defiantly through Mr. Rooney’s fetid parlors distorted their equations into insoluble anagrams. He made a last night’s effort with the proverbial wet towel, and then blissfully took the exam, wondering unhappily why all the color and ambition of the spring before had faded out.	Mr. Rooney's stuffy, smelly classrooms

something in their calm and tantalizing respectability breathing defiantly through Mr. Rooney’s fetid parlors distorted their equations into insoluble anagrams.	Most of them were so stupid or careless that they wouldn’t admit when they didn’t understand, and Amory was of the latter. He found it impossible to study conic sections; something in their calm and tantalizing respectability breathing defiantly through Mr. Rooney’s fetid parlors distorted their equations into insoluble anagrams. He made a last night’s effort with the proverbial wet towel, and then blissfully took the exam, wondering unhappily why all the color and ambition of the spring before had faded out.	Their boring, respectable nature, emphasized by being taught in Mr. Rooney's smelly classroom, made the equations impossible to understand.

conic sections	Most of them were so stupid or careless that they wouldn’t admit when they didn’t understand, and Amory was of the latter. He found it impossible to study conic sections; something in their calm and tantalizing respectability breathing defiantly through Mr. Rooney’s fetid parlors distorted their equations into insoluble anagrams. He made a last night’s effort with the proverbial wet towel, and then blissfully took the exam, wondering unhappily why all the color and ambition of the spring before had faded out.	shapes made by slicing a cone

a last night’s effort	He found it impossible to study conic sections; something in their calm and tantalizing respectability breathing defiantly through Mr. Rooney’s fetid parlors distorted their equations into insoluble anagrams. He made a last night’s effort with the proverbial wet towel, and then blissfully took the exam, wondering unhappily why all the color and ambition of the spring before had faded out. Somehow, with the defection of Isabelle the idea of undergraduate success had loosed its grasp on his imagination, and he contemplated a possible failure to pass off his condition with equanimity, even though it would arbitrarily mean his removal from the Princetonian board and the slaughter of his chances for the Senior Council.	a final night's attempt

the proverbial wet towel	He found it impossible to study conic sections; something in their calm and tantalizing respectability breathing defiantly through Mr. Rooney’s fetid parlors distorted their equations into insoluble anagrams. He made a last night’s effort with the proverbial wet towel, and then blissfully took the exam, wondering unhappily why all the color and ambition of the spring before had faded out. Somehow, with the defection of Isabelle the idea of undergraduate success had loosed its grasp on his imagination, and he contemplated a possible failure to pass off his condition with equanimity, even though it would arbitrarily mean his removal from the Princetonian board and the slaughter of his chances for the Senior Council.	a desperate last-ditch effort

color and ambition of the spring before had faded out.	He found it impossible to study conic sections; something in their calm and tantalizing respectability breathing defiantly through Mr. Rooney’s fetid parlors distorted their equations into insoluble anagrams. He made a last night’s effort with the proverbial wet towel, and then blissfully took the exam, wondering unhappily why all the color and ambition of the spring before had faded out. Somehow, with the defection of Isabelle the idea of undergraduate success had loosed its grasp on his imagination, and he contemplated a possible failure to pass off his condition with equanimity, even though it would arbitrarily mean his removal from the Princetonian board and the slaughter of his chances for the Senior Council.	The enthusiasm and goals he had last spring were gone.

defection of Isabelle the idea of undergraduate success had loosed its grasp on his imagination, and he contemplated a possible failure to pass off his condition with equanimity, even though it would arbitrarily mean his removal from the Princetonian board and the slaughter of his chances for the Senior Council.	He made a last night’s effort with the proverbial wet towel, and then blissfully took the exam, wondering unhappily why all the color and ambition of the spring before had faded out. Somehow, with the defection of Isabelle the idea of undergraduate success had loosed its grasp on his imagination, and he contemplated a possible failure to pass off his condition with equanimity, even though it would arbitrarily mean his removal from the Princetonian board and the slaughter of his chances for the Senior Council. There was always his luck.	Since Isabelle left, he didn't care as much about succeeding in college. He calmly considered the possibility of failing, even though it would unfairly get him kicked off the Princetonian board and ruin his chances of being on the Senior Council.

the Princetonian board	He made a last night’s effort with the proverbial wet towel, and then blissfully took the exam, wondering unhappily why all the color and ambition of the spring before had faded out. Somehow, with the defection of Isabelle the idea of undergraduate success had loosed its grasp on his imagination, and he contemplated a possible failure to pass off his condition with equanimity, even though it would arbitrarily mean his removal from the Princetonian board and the slaughter of his chances for the Senior Council. There was always his luck.	the student newspaper

sauntered from the room.	There was always his luck. He yawned, scribbled his honor pledge on the cover, and sauntered from the room. “If you don’t pass it,” said the newly arrived Alec as they sat on the window-seat of Amory’s room and mused upon a scheme of wall decoration, “you’re the world’s worst goopher.	walked casually out of the room.

wall decoration	He yawned, scribbled his honor pledge on the cover, and sauntered from the room. “If you don’t pass it,” said the newly arrived Alec as they sat on the window-seat of Amory’s room and mused upon a scheme of wall decoration, “you’re the world’s worst goopher. Your stock will go down like an elevator at the club and on the campus.”	decorating the walls

Amory’s room	He yawned, scribbled his honor pledge on the cover, and sauntered from the room. “If you don’t pass it,” said the newly arrived Alec as they sat on the window-seat of Amory’s room and mused upon a scheme of wall decoration, “you’re the world’s worst goopher. Your stock will go down like an elevator at the club and on the campus.”	Amory's room

the world’s worst goopher	He yawned, scribbled his honor pledge on the cover, and sauntered from the room. “If you don’t pass it,” said the newly arrived Alec as they sat on the window-seat of Amory’s room and mused upon a scheme of wall decoration, “you’re the world’s worst goopher. Your stock will go down like an elevator at the club and on the campus.”	the world's worst jinx

the newly arrived Alec	He yawned, scribbled his honor pledge on the cover, and sauntered from the room. “If you don’t pass it,” said the newly arrived Alec as they sat on the window-seat of Amory’s room and mused upon a scheme of wall decoration, “you’re the world’s worst goopher. Your stock will go down like an elevator at the club and on the campus.”	Alec, who had just arrived

’re the world’s worst goopher.	He yawned, scribbled his honor pledge on the cover, and sauntered from the room. “If you don’t pass it,” said the newly arrived Alec as they sat on the window-seat of Amory’s room and mused upon a scheme of wall decoration, “you’re the world’s worst goopher. Your stock will go down like an elevator at the club and on the campus.”	you're incredibly unlucky.

go down like an elevator at the club and on the campus.”	“If you don’t pass it,” said the newly arrived Alec as they sat on the window-seat of Amory’s room and mused upon a scheme of wall decoration, “you’re the world’s worst goopher. Your stock will go down like an elevator at the club and on the campus.” “Oh, hell, I know it.	Your reputation will plummet everywhere.

risk what you were in line for ought to be ineligible for Princetonian chairman.”	“ ’Cause you deserve it. Anybody that’d risk what you were in line for ought to be ineligible for Princetonian chairman.” “Oh, drop the subject,” Amory protested.	risk what you were about to get shouldn't be allowed to be chairman of the Princetonian."

Princetonian chairman	“ ’Cause you deserve it. Anybody that’d risk what you were in line for ought to be ineligible for Princetonian chairman.” “Oh, drop the subject,” Amory protested.	Head of the Princetonian

asking me about it, as if I were a prize potato being fattened for a vegetable show.”	“Watch and wait and shut up. I don’t want everyone at the club asking me about it, as if I were a prize potato being fattened for a vegetable show.” One evening a week later Amory stopped below his own window on the way to Renwick’s, and, seeing a light, called up: “Oh, Tom, any mail?”	asking me about it, like I'm some potato being fattened up to win a prize at a vegetable show.

stopped below his own window on the way to Renwick’s, and, seeing a light, called up: “Oh, Tom, any mail?”	I don’t want everyone at the club asking me about it, as if I were a prize potato being fattened for a vegetable show.” One evening a week later Amory stopped below his own window on the way to Renwick’s, and, seeing a light, called up: “Oh, Tom, any mail?” Alec’s head appeared against the yellow square of light.	stopped under his window on the way to Renwick’s and, seeing a light, called up: “Hey Tom, any mail?”

Alec’s head	One evening a week later Amory stopped below his own window on the way to Renwick’s, and, seeing a light, called up: “Oh, Tom, any mail?” Alec’s head appeared against the yellow square of light. “Yes, your result’s here.”	Alec's head.

over to the table, and then suddenly noticed that there were other people in the room.	Better come up.” He walked into the room and straight over to the table, and then suddenly noticed that there were other people in the room. “ ’Lo, Kerry.”	He went to the table and then suddenly saw other people in the room.

“Registrar’s Office	“Ah, men of Princeton.” They seemed to be mostly friends, so he picked up the envelope marked “Registrar’s Office,” and weighed it nervously. “We have here quite a slip of paper.”	Registrar's Office

envelope marked “Registrar’s Office,” and weighed it nervously.	“Ah, men of Princeton.” They seemed to be mostly friends, so he picked up the envelope marked “Registrar’s Office,” and weighed it nervously. “We have here quite a slip of paper.”	envelope labeled "Registrar's Office" and nervously felt its weight.

withdrawn from the editorial board of the Prince, and my short career is over.”	“Open it, Amory.” “Just to be dramatic, I’ll let you know that if it’s blue, my name is withdrawn from the editorial board of the Prince, and my short career is over.” He paused, and then saw for the first time Ferrenby’s eyes, wearing a hungry look and watching him eagerly.	I'm quitting the Prince's editorial board, and my brief success will be finished.

time Ferrenby’s eyes, wearing a hungry look and watching him eagerly.	“Just to be dramatic, I’ll let you know that if it’s blue, my name is withdrawn from the editorial board of the Prince, and my short career is over.” He paused, and then saw for the first time Ferrenby’s eyes, wearing a hungry look and watching him eagerly. Amory returned the gaze pointedly.	Ferrenby's eyes looked hungry and watched him eagerly.

Ferrenby’s eyes	“Just to be dramatic, I’ll let you know that if it’s blue, my name is withdrawn from the editorial board of the Prince, and my short career is over.” He paused, and then saw for the first time Ferrenby’s eyes, wearing a hungry look and watching him eagerly. Amory returned the gaze pointedly.	Ferrenby's eyes

the primitive emotions	Amory returned the gaze pointedly. “Watch my face, gentlemen, for the primitive emotions.” He tore it open and held the slip up to the light.	basic feelings

Watch my face, gentlemen, for the primitive emotions.”	Amory returned the gaze pointedly. “Watch my face, gentlemen, for the primitive emotions.” He tore it open and held the slip up to the light.	"Gentlemen, watch my face for my true feelings."

held the slip up to the light.	“Watch my face, gentlemen, for the primitive emotions.” He tore it open and held the slip up to the light. “Well?” “Pink or blue?”	Held the paper up to the light.

crowd of seconds swept by.	There was a pause. a small crowd of seconds swept by. then he looked again and another crowd went on into time.	Seconds ticked by.

from early September to late in the spring was so purposeless and inconsecutive that it seems scarcely worth recording.	What Amory did that year from early September to late in the spring was so purposeless and inconsecutive that it seems scarcely worth recording. He was, of course, immediately sorry for what he had lost.	from early September to late in the spring was so aimless and disjointed that it's hardly worth writing about.

philosophy of success had tumbled down upon him, and he looked for the reasons.	He was, of course, immediately sorry for what he had lost. His philosophy of success had tumbled down upon him, and he looked for the reasons. “Your own laziness,” said Alec later.	His ideas about how to succeed had collapsed, and he wanted to know why.

stage a comeback.”	“I hate that point of view.” “Of course, with a little effort you could still stage a comeback.” “No—I’m through—as far as ever being a power in college is concerned.”	make a return.

power in college is concerned.”	“Of course, with a little effort you could still stage a comeback.” “No—I’m through—as far as ever being a power in college is concerned.” “But, Amory, honestly, what makes me the angriest isn’t the fact that you won’t be chairman of the Prince and on the Senior Council, but just that you didn’t get down and pass that exam.”	being influential in college.

chairman of the Prince and on the Senior Council, but just that you didn’t get down and pass that exam.”	“No—I’m through—as far as ever being a power in college is concerned.” “But, Amory, honestly, what makes me the angriest isn’t the fact that you won’t be chairman of the Prince and on the Senior Council, but just that you didn’t get down and pass that exam.” “Not me,” said Amory slowly; “I’m mad at the concrete thing.	chairman of the school paper and on the Senior Council, but that you didn't buckle down and pass that exam.

My own idleness	“Not me,” said Amory slowly; “I’m mad at the concrete thing. My own idleness was quite in accord with my system, but the luck broke.” “Your system broke, you mean.”	My laziness

accord with my system, but the luck broke.”	“Not me,” said Amory slowly; “I’m mad at the concrete thing. My own idleness was quite in accord with my system, but the luck broke.” “Your system broke, you mean.”	fit my plan, but my luck ran out.

bum around for two more years as a has-been?”	“Well, what are you going to do? Get a better one quick, or just bum around for two more years as a has-been?” “I don’t know yet.”	hang out doing nothing for two more years as someone who's no longer successful?

“Oh, Amory	“I don’t know yet.” “Oh, Amory, buck up!” “Maybe.”	, cheer up!”

Amory, buck up!”	“I don’t know yet.” “Oh, Amory, buck up!” “Maybe.”	Amory, cheer up!

Amory’s point	“Maybe.” Amory’s point of view, though dangerous, was not far from the true one. If his reactions to his environment could be tabulated, the chart would have appeared like this, beginning with his earliest years:	Amory's idea

beginning with his earliest years:	Amory’s point of view, though dangerous, was not far from the true one. If his reactions to his environment could be tabulated, the chart would have appeared like this, beginning with his earliest years: The fundamental Amory.	from when he was very young:

The fundamental Amory	If his reactions to his environment could be tabulated, the chart would have appeared like this, beginning with his earliest years: The fundamental Amory. Amory plus Beatrice.	The basic, essential Amory.

pulled him to pieces and started him over again: Amory plus St. Regis’.	Amory plus Beatrice plus Minneapolis. Then St. Regis’ had pulled him to pieces and started him over again: Amory plus St. Regis’. Amory plus St. Regis’ plus Princeton.	completely changed him: Amory plus St. Regis'.

approach to success through conformity.	Amory plus St. Regis’ plus Princeton. That had been his nearest approach to success through conformity. The fundamental Amory, idle, imaginative, rebellious, had been nearly snowed under.	succeeding by fitting in.

The fundamental Amory	The fundamental Amory, idle, imaginative, rebellious, had been nearly snowed under. He had conformed, he had succeeded, but as his imagination was neither satisfied nor grasped by his own success, he had listlessly, half-accidentally chucked the whole thing and become again: The fundamental Amory.	The core Amory

chucked the whole thing and become again: The fundamental Amory.	The fundamental Amory, idle, imaginative, rebellious, had been nearly snowed under. He had conformed, he had succeeded, but as his imagination was neither satisfied nor grasped by his own success, he had listlessly, half-accidentally chucked the whole thing and become again: The fundamental Amory.	given up everything and gone back to being his true self.

died quietly and inconspicuously at Thanksgiving.	His father died quietly and inconspicuously at Thanksgiving. The incongruity of death with either the beauties of Lake Geneva or with his mother’s dignified, reticent attitude diverted him, and he looked at the funeral with an amused tolerance.	died peacefully and unnoticed on Thanksgiving.

an amused tolerance	His father died quietly and inconspicuously at Thanksgiving. The incongruity of death with either the beauties of Lake Geneva or with his mother’s dignified, reticent attitude diverted him, and he looked at the funeral with an amused tolerance. He decided that burial was after all preferable to cremation, and he smiled at his old boyhood choice, slow oxidation in the top of a tree.	a mildly amused acceptance

his mother’s dignified, reticent attitude	His father died quietly and inconspicuously at Thanksgiving. The incongruity of death with either the beauties of Lake Geneva or with his mother’s dignified, reticent attitude diverted him, and he looked at the funeral with an amused tolerance. He decided that burial was after all preferable to cremation, and he smiled at his old boyhood choice, slow oxidation in the top of a tree.	his mother's composed and reserved manner

incongruity of death with either the beauties of Lake Geneva or with his mother’s dignified, reticent attitude diverted him, and he looked at the funeral with an amused tolerance.	His father died quietly and inconspicuously at Thanksgiving. The incongruity of death with either the beauties of Lake Geneva or with his mother’s dignified, reticent attitude diverted him, and he looked at the funeral with an amused tolerance. He decided that burial was after all preferable to cremation, and he smiled at his old boyhood choice, slow oxidation in the top of a tree.	The jarring contrast between death and the beautiful scenery of Lake Geneva, or his mother's composed and reserved demeanor, distracted him, and he viewed the funeral with detached amusement.

slow oxidation	The incongruity of death with either the beauties of Lake Geneva or with his mother’s dignified, reticent attitude diverted him, and he looked at the funeral with an amused tolerance. He decided that burial was after all preferable to cremation, and he smiled at his old boyhood choice, slow oxidation in the top of a tree. The day after the ceremony he was amusing himself in the great library by sinking back on a couch in graceful mortuary attitudes, trying to determine whether he would, when his day came, be found with his arms crossed piously over his chest (Monsignor Darcy had once advocated this posture as being the most distinguished), or with his hands clasped behind his head, a more pagan and Byronic attitude.	rotting slowly

his old boyhood choice	The incongruity of death with either the beauties of Lake Geneva or with his mother’s dignified, reticent attitude diverted him, and he looked at the funeral with an amused tolerance. He decided that burial was after all preferable to cremation, and he smiled at his old boyhood choice, slow oxidation in the top of a tree. The day after the ceremony he was amusing himself in the great library by sinking back on a couch in graceful mortuary attitudes, trying to determine whether he would, when his day came, be found with his arms crossed piously over his chest (Monsignor Darcy had once advocated this posture as being the most distinguished), or with his hands clasped behind his head, a more pagan and Byronic attitude.	what he had wanted as a child

couch in graceful mortuary attitudes, trying to determine whether he would, when his day came, be found with his arms crossed piously over his chest (Monsignor Darcy had once advocated this posture as being the most distinguished), or with his hands clasped behind his head, a more pagan and Byronic attitude.	He decided that burial was after all preferable to cremation, and he smiled at his old boyhood choice, slow oxidation in the top of a tree. The day after the ceremony he was amusing himself in the great library by sinking back on a couch in graceful mortuary attitudes, trying to determine whether he would, when his day came, be found with his arms crossed piously over his chest (Monsignor Darcy had once advocated this posture as being the most distinguished), or with his hands clasped behind his head, a more pagan and Byronic attitude. What interested him much more than the final departure of his father from things mundane was a tri-cornered conversation between Beatrice, Mr. Barton, of Barton and Krogman, their lawyers, and himself, that took place several days after the funeral.	couch, striking elegant poses like he was already dead, trying to decide if he wanted to be found with his arms crossed over his chest (Monsignor Darcy thought this looked most dignified) or with his hands behind his head, which seemed more rebellious and like Lord Byron.

a more pagan and Byronic attitude	He decided that burial was after all preferable to cremation, and he smiled at his old boyhood choice, slow oxidation in the top of a tree. The day after the ceremony he was amusing himself in the great library by sinking back on a couch in graceful mortuary attitudes, trying to determine whether he would, when his day came, be found with his arms crossed piously over his chest (Monsignor Darcy had once advocated this posture as being the most distinguished), or with his hands clasped behind his head, a more pagan and Byronic attitude. What interested him much more than the final departure of his father from things mundane was a tri-cornered conversation between Beatrice, Mr. Barton, of Barton and Krogman, their lawyers, and himself, that took place several days after the funeral.	a more rebellious and unconventional pose

graceful mortuary attitudes	He decided that burial was after all preferable to cremation, and he smiled at his old boyhood choice, slow oxidation in the top of a tree. The day after the ceremony he was amusing himself in the great library by sinking back on a couch in graceful mortuary attitudes, trying to determine whether he would, when his day came, be found with his arms crossed piously over his chest (Monsignor Darcy had once advocated this posture as being the most distinguished), or with his hands clasped behind his head, a more pagan and Byronic attitude. What interested him much more than the final departure of his father from things mundane was a tri-cornered conversation between Beatrice, Mr. Barton, of Barton and Krogman, their lawyers, and himself, that took place several days after the funeral.	posing gracefully as if he were dead

a tri-cornered conversation	The day after the ceremony he was amusing himself in the great library by sinking back on a couch in graceful mortuary attitudes, trying to determine whether he would, when his day came, be found with his arms crossed piously over his chest (Monsignor Darcy had once advocated this posture as being the most distinguished), or with his hands clasped behind his head, a more pagan and Byronic attitude. What interested him much more than the final departure of his father from things mundane was a tri-cornered conversation between Beatrice, Mr. Barton, of Barton and Krogman, their lawyers, and himself, that took place several days after the funeral. For the first time he came into actual cognizance of the family finances, and realized what a tidy fortune had once been under his father’s management.	a three-way conversation

took place several days after the funeral.	The day after the ceremony he was amusing himself in the great library by sinking back on a couch in graceful mortuary attitudes, trying to determine whether he would, when his day came, be found with his arms crossed piously over his chest (Monsignor Darcy had once advocated this posture as being the most distinguished), or with his hands clasped behind his head, a more pagan and Byronic attitude. What interested him much more than the final departure of his father from things mundane was a tri-cornered conversation between Beatrice, Mr. Barton, of Barton and Krogman, their lawyers, and himself, that took place several days after the funeral. For the first time he came into actual cognizance of the family finances, and realized what a tidy fortune had once been under his father’s management.	happened a few days after the funeral.

a tidy fortune	What interested him much more than the final departure of his father from things mundane was a tri-cornered conversation between Beatrice, Mr. Barton, of Barton and Krogman, their lawyers, and himself, that took place several days after the funeral. For the first time he came into actual cognizance of the family finances, and realized what a tidy fortune had once been under his father’s management. He took a ledger labelled “1906” and ran through it rather carefully.	a good amount of money

actual cognizance	What interested him much more than the final departure of his father from things mundane was a tri-cornered conversation between Beatrice, Mr. Barton, of Barton and Krogman, their lawyers, and himself, that took place several days after the funeral. For the first time he came into actual cognizance of the family finances, and realized what a tidy fortune had once been under his father’s management. He took a ledger labelled “1906” and ran through it rather carefully.	real understanding

his father’s management	What interested him much more than the final departure of his father from things mundane was a tri-cornered conversation between Beatrice, Mr. Barton, of Barton and Krogman, their lawyers, and himself, that took place several days after the funeral. For the first time he came into actual cognizance of the family finances, and realized what a tidy fortune had once been under his father’s management. He took a ledger labelled “1906” and ran through it rather carefully.	how his father handled things

came into actual cognizance of the family finances, and realized what a tidy fortune had once been under his father’s management.	What interested him much more than the final departure of his father from things mundane was a tri-cornered conversation between Beatrice, Mr. Barton, of Barton and Krogman, their lawyers, and himself, that took place several days after the funeral. For the first time he came into actual cognizance of the family finances, and realized what a tidy fortune had once been under his father’s management. He took a ledger labelled “1906” and ran through it rather carefully.	understood the family's financial situation and how much money his father had once controlled.

Beatrice’s own income	The total expenditure that year had come to something over one hundred and ten thousand dollars. Forty thousand of this had been Beatrice’s own income, and there had been no attempt to account for it: it was all under the heading, “Drafts, checks, and letters of credit forwarded to Beatrice Blaine.” The dispersal of the rest was rather minutely itemized: the taxes and improvements on the Lake Geneva estate had come to almost nine thousand dollars; the general upkeep, including Beatrice’s electric and a French car, bought that year, was over thirty-five thousand dollars.	Beatrice's money

letters of credit forwarded to Beatrice Blaine.”	The total expenditure that year had come to something over one hundred and ten thousand dollars. Forty thousand of this had been Beatrice’s own income, and there had been no attempt to account for it: it was all under the heading, “Drafts, checks, and letters of credit forwarded to Beatrice Blaine.” The dispersal of the rest was rather minutely itemized: the taxes and improvements on the Lake Geneva estate had come to almost nine thousand dollars; the general upkeep, including Beatrice’s electric and a French car, bought that year, was over thirty-five thousand dollars.	money sent to Beatrice Blaine

Beatrice’s electric	Forty thousand of this had been Beatrice’s own income, and there had been no attempt to account for it: it was all under the heading, “Drafts, checks, and letters of credit forwarded to Beatrice Blaine.” The dispersal of the rest was rather minutely itemized: the taxes and improvements on the Lake Geneva estate had come to almost nine thousand dollars; the general upkeep, including Beatrice’s electric and a French car, bought that year, was over thirty-five thousand dollars. The rest was fully taken care of, and there were invariably items which failed to balance on the right side of the ledger.	Beatrice's electric car

the general upkeep	Forty thousand of this had been Beatrice’s own income, and there had been no attempt to account for it: it was all under the heading, “Drafts, checks, and letters of credit forwarded to Beatrice Blaine.” The dispersal of the rest was rather minutely itemized: the taxes and improvements on the Lake Geneva estate had come to almost nine thousand dollars; the general upkeep, including Beatrice’s electric and a French car, bought that year, was over thirty-five thousand dollars. The rest was fully taken care of, and there were invariably items which failed to balance on the right side of the ledger.	general maintenance

upkeep, including Beatrice’s electric and a French car, bought that year, was over thirty-five thousand dollars.	Forty thousand of this had been Beatrice’s own income, and there had been no attempt to account for it: it was all under the heading, “Drafts, checks, and letters of credit forwarded to Beatrice Blaine.” The dispersal of the rest was rather minutely itemized: the taxes and improvements on the Lake Geneva estate had come to almost nine thousand dollars; the general upkeep, including Beatrice’s electric and a French car, bought that year, was over thirty-five thousand dollars. The rest was fully taken care of, and there were invariably items which failed to balance on the right side of the ledger.	Maintenance, including Beatrice's electric car and a French car bought that year, cost over thirty-five thousand dollars.

balance on the right side of the ledger.	The dispersal of the rest was rather minutely itemized: the taxes and improvements on the Lake Geneva estate had come to almost nine thousand dollars; the general upkeep, including Beatrice’s electric and a French car, bought that year, was over thirty-five thousand dollars. The rest was fully taken care of, and there were invariably items which failed to balance on the right side of the ledger. In the volume for 1912 Amory was shocked to discover the decrease in the number of bond holdings and the great drop in the income.	add up to more than expenses.

volume for 1912 Amory was shocked to discover the decrease in the number of bond holdings and the great drop in the income.	The rest was fully taken care of, and there were invariably items which failed to balance on the right side of the ledger. In the volume for 1912 Amory was shocked to discover the decrease in the number of bond holdings and the great drop in the income. In the case of Beatrice’s money this was not so pronounced, but it was obvious that his father had devoted the previous year to several unfortunate gambles in oil.	In the 1912 records, Amory was shocked to see fewer bonds and a much lower income.

gambles in oil.	In the volume for 1912 Amory was shocked to discover the decrease in the number of bond holdings and the great drop in the income. In the case of Beatrice’s money this was not so pronounced, but it was obvious that his father had devoted the previous year to several unfortunate gambles in oil. Very little of the oil had been burned, but Stephen Blaine had been rather badly singed.	risky investments in oil.

several unfortunate gambles	In the volume for 1912 Amory was shocked to discover the decrease in the number of bond holdings and the great drop in the income. In the case of Beatrice’s money this was not so pronounced, but it was obvious that his father had devoted the previous year to several unfortunate gambles in oil. Very little of the oil had been burned, but Stephen Blaine had been rather badly singed.	some bad bets

Beatrice’s money	In the volume for 1912 Amory was shocked to discover the decrease in the number of bond holdings and the great drop in the income. In the case of Beatrice’s money this was not so pronounced, but it was obvious that his father had devoted the previous year to several unfortunate gambles in oil. Very little of the oil had been burned, but Stephen Blaine had been rather badly singed.	Beatrice's money

little of the oil had been burned, but Stephen Blaine had been rather badly singed.	In the case of Beatrice’s money this was not so pronounced, but it was obvious that his father had devoted the previous year to several unfortunate gambles in oil. Very little of the oil had been burned, but Stephen Blaine had been rather badly singed. The next year and the next and the next showed similar decreases, and Beatrice had for the first time begun using her own money for keeping up the house.	The oil wells didn't produce much, but Stephen Blaine lost a lot of money.

had for the first time begun using her own money for keeping up the house.	Very little of the oil had been burned, but Stephen Blaine had been rather badly singed. The next year and the next and the next showed similar decreases, and Beatrice had for the first time begun using her own money for keeping up the house. Yet her doctor’s bill for 1913 had been over nine thousand dollars.	started using her own money to pay for the house for the first time.

bill for 1913 had been over nine thousand dollars.	The next year and the next and the next showed similar decreases, and Beatrice had for the first time begun using her own money for keeping up the house. Yet her doctor’s bill for 1913 had been over nine thousand dollars. About the exact state of things Mr. Barton was quite vague and confused.	The doctor's bill for 1913 was more than nine thousand dollars.

her doctor’s bill	The next year and the next and the next showed similar decreases, and Beatrice had for the first time begun using her own money for keeping up the house. Yet her doctor’s bill for 1913 had been over nine thousand dollars. About the exact state of things Mr. Barton was quite vague and confused.	what she owed the doctor

state of things Mr. Barton was quite vague and confused.	Yet her doctor’s bill for 1913 had been over nine thousand dollars. About the exact state of things Mr. Barton was quite vague and confused. There had been recent investments, the outcome of which was for the present problematical, and he had an idea there were further speculations and exchanges concerning which he had not been consulted.	Mr. Barton didn't really understand the situation.

speculations and exchanges concerning which he had not been consulted.	About the exact state of things Mr. Barton was quite vague and confused. There had been recent investments, the outcome of which was for the present problematical, and he had an idea there were further speculations and exchanges concerning which he had not been consulted. It was not for several months that Beatrice wrote Amory the full situation.	risky investments and deals he didn't know about.

further speculations	About the exact state of things Mr. Barton was quite vague and confused. There had been recent investments, the outcome of which was for the present problematical, and he had an idea there were further speculations and exchanges concerning which he had not been consulted. It was not for several months that Beatrice wrote Amory the full situation.	more risky investments

was not for several months that Beatrice wrote Amory the full situation.	There had been recent investments, the outcome of which was for the present problematical, and he had an idea there were further speculations and exchanges concerning which he had not been consulted. It was not for several months that Beatrice wrote Amory the full situation. The entire residue of the Blaine and O’Hara fortunes consisted of the place at Lake Geneva and approximately a half million dollars, invested now in fairly conservative six-per-cent holdings.	Beatrice didn't tell Amory the whole story for several months.

residue of the Blaine and O’Hara fortunes consisted of the place at Lake Geneva and approximately a half million dollars, invested now in fairly conservative six-per-cent holdings.	It was not for several months that Beatrice wrote Amory the full situation. The entire residue of the Blaine and O’Hara fortunes consisted of the place at Lake Geneva and approximately a half million dollars, invested now in fairly conservative six-per-cent holdings. In fact, Beatrice wrote that she was putting the money into railroad and streetcar bonds as fast as she could conveniently transfer it.	what was left of the Blaine and O'Hara fortunes was the Lake Geneva property and about half a million dollars, invested in safe investments earning six percent.

The entire residue	It was not for several months that Beatrice wrote Amory the full situation. The entire residue of the Blaine and O’Hara fortunes consisted of the place at Lake Geneva and approximately a half million dollars, invested now in fairly conservative six-per-cent holdings. In fact, Beatrice wrote that she was putting the money into railroad and streetcar bonds as fast as she could conveniently transfer it.	Everything that was left

O’Hara fortunes	It was not for several months that Beatrice wrote Amory the full situation. The entire residue of the Blaine and O’Hara fortunes consisted of the place at Lake Geneva and approximately a half million dollars, invested now in fairly conservative six-per-cent holdings. In fact, Beatrice wrote that she was putting the money into railroad and streetcar bonds as fast as she could conveniently transfer it.	O'Hara family money

approximately a half million dollars	It was not for several months that Beatrice wrote Amory the full situation. The entire residue of the Blaine and O’Hara fortunes consisted of the place at Lake Geneva and approximately a half million dollars, invested now in fairly conservative six-per-cent holdings. In fact, Beatrice wrote that she was putting the money into railroad and streetcar bonds as fast as she could conveniently transfer it.	about $500,000

putting the money into railroad and streetcar bonds as fast as she could conveniently transfer it.	The entire residue of the Blaine and O’Hara fortunes consisted of the place at Lake Geneva and approximately a half million dollars, invested now in fairly conservative six-per-cent holdings. In fact, Beatrice wrote that she was putting the money into railroad and streetcar bonds as fast as she could conveniently transfer it. “I am quite sure,” she wrote to Amory, “that if there is one thing we can be positive of, it is that people will not stay in one place.	investing the money in railroad and streetcar bonds as quickly as she could manage.

railroad and streetcar bonds	The entire residue of the Blaine and O’Hara fortunes consisted of the place at Lake Geneva and approximately a half million dollars, invested now in fairly conservative six-per-cent holdings. In fact, Beatrice wrote that she was putting the money into railroad and streetcar bonds as fast as she could conveniently transfer it. “I am quite sure,” she wrote to Amory, “that if there is one thing we can be positive of, it is that people will not stay in one place.	Investments in railroads and streetcars.

call the streetcars.	This Ford person has certainly made the most of that idea. So I am instructing Mr. Barton to specialize on such things as Northern Pacific and these Rapid Transit Companies, as they call the streetcars. I shall never forgive myself for not buying Bethlehem Steel.	refer to the streetcars.

forgive myself for not buying Bethlehem Steel.	So I am instructing Mr. Barton to specialize on such things as Northern Pacific and these Rapid Transit Companies, as they call the streetcars. I shall never forgive myself for not buying Bethlehem Steel. I’ve heard the most fascinating stories.	I regret not buying Bethlehem Steel.

go into finance, Amory.	I’ve heard the most fascinating stories. You must go into finance, Amory. I’m sure you would revel in it.	go into finance, Amory.

revel in it.	You must go into finance, Amory. I’m sure you would revel in it. You start as a messenger or a teller, I believe, and from that you go up—almost indefinitely.	enjoy it.

start as a messenger or a teller, I believe, and from that you go up—almost indefinitely.	I’m sure you would revel in it. You start as a messenger or a teller, I believe, and from that you go up—almost indefinitely. I’m sure if I were a man I’d love the handling of money; it has become quite a senile passion with me.	begin as a messenger or cashier, I think, and then you can advance almost without limit.

quite a senile passion	You start as a messenger or a teller, I believe, and from that you go up—almost indefinitely. I’m sure if I were a man I’d love the handling of money; it has become quite a senile passion with me. Before I get any farther I want to discuss something.	a silly obsession

man I’d love the handling of money; it has become quite a senile passion with me.	You start as a messenger or a teller, I believe, and from that you go up—almost indefinitely. I’m sure if I were a man I’d love the handling of money; it has become quite a senile passion with me. Before I get any farther I want to discuss something.	I'd love managing money; I'm obsessed with it.

wore their summer underwear all during the winter, and also went about with their heads wet and in low shoes on the coldest days.	Before I get any farther I want to discuss something. A Mrs. Bispam, an overcordial little lady whom I met at a tea the other day, told me that her son, he is at Yale, wrote her that all the boys there wore their summer underwear all during the winter, and also went about with their heads wet and in low shoes on the coldest days. Now, Amory, I don’t know whether that is a fad at Princeton too, but I don’t want you to be so foolish.	wore light underwear in the winter, went around with wet hair, and wore shoes that didn't cover their feet even when it was freezing.

an overcordial little lady	Before I get any farther I want to discuss something. A Mrs. Bispam, an overcordial little lady whom I met at a tea the other day, told me that her son, he is at Yale, wrote her that all the boys there wore their summer underwear all during the winter, and also went about with their heads wet and in low shoes on the coldest days. Now, Amory, I don’t know whether that is a fad at Princeton too, but I don’t want you to be so foolish.	an overly friendly woman

A Mrs. Bispam	Before I get any farther I want to discuss something. A Mrs. Bispam, an overcordial little lady whom I met at a tea the other day, told me that her son, he is at Yale, wrote her that all the boys there wore their summer underwear all during the winter, and also went about with their heads wet and in low shoes on the coldest days. Now, Amory, I don’t know whether that is a fad at Princeton too, but I don’t want you to be so foolish.	A Mrs. Bispam

fad at Princeton too, but I don’t want you to be so foolish.	A Mrs. Bispam, an overcordial little lady whom I met at a tea the other day, told me that her son, he is at Yale, wrote her that all the boys there wore their summer underwear all during the winter, and also went about with their heads wet and in low shoes on the coldest days. Now, Amory, I don’t know whether that is a fad at Princeton too, but I don’t want you to be so foolish. It not only inclines a young man to pneumonia and infantile paralysis, but to all forms of lung trouble, to which you are particularly inclined.	a trend at Princeton too, but I don't want you to be so silly.

are particularly inclined.	Now, Amory, I don’t know whether that is a fad at Princeton too, but I don’t want you to be so foolish. It not only inclines a young man to pneumonia and infantile paralysis, but to all forms of lung trouble, to which you are particularly inclined. You cannot experiment with your health.	are especially likely to get.

infantile paralysis	Now, Amory, I don’t know whether that is a fad at Princeton too, but I don’t want you to be so foolish. It not only inclines a young man to pneumonia and infantile paralysis, but to all forms of lung trouble, to which you are particularly inclined. You cannot experiment with your health.	polio

make myself ridiculous as some mothers no doubt do, by insisting that you wear overshoes, though I remember one Christmas you wore them around constantly without a single buckle latched, making such a curious swishing sound, and you refused to buckle them because it was not the thing to do.	I have found that out. I will not make myself ridiculous as some mothers no doubt do, by insisting that you wear overshoes, though I remember one Christmas you wore them around constantly without a single buckle latched, making such a curious swishing sound, and you refused to buckle them because it was not the thing to do. The very next Christmas you would not wear even rubbers, though I begged you.	embarrass myself like some mothers probably do by forcing you to wear overshoes, even though I remember one Christmas you wore them all the time without buckling them, making a funny swishing noise, and you wouldn't buckle them because it wasn't cool.

such a curious swishing sound	I have found that out. I will not make myself ridiculous as some mothers no doubt do, by insisting that you wear overshoes, though I remember one Christmas you wore them around constantly without a single buckle latched, making such a curious swishing sound, and you refused to buckle them because it was not the thing to do. The very next Christmas you would not wear even rubbers, though I begged you.	a strange whooshing noise

a single buckle	I have found that out. I will not make myself ridiculous as some mothers no doubt do, by insisting that you wear overshoes, though I remember one Christmas you wore them around constantly without a single buckle latched, making such a curious swishing sound, and you refused to buckle them because it was not the thing to do. The very next Christmas you would not wear even rubbers, though I begged you.	one buckle

wear even rubbers, though I begged you.	I will not make myself ridiculous as some mothers no doubt do, by insisting that you wear overshoes, though I remember one Christmas you wore them around constantly without a single buckle latched, making such a curious swishing sound, and you refused to buckle them because it was not the thing to do. The very next Christmas you would not wear even rubbers, though I begged you. You are nearly twenty years old now, dear, and I can’t be with you constantly to find whether you are doing the sensible thing.	wear even rain boots, even though I asked you to.

be with you constantly to find whether you are doing the sensible thing.	The very next Christmas you would not wear even rubbers, though I begged you. You are nearly twenty years old now, dear, and I can’t be with you constantly to find whether you are doing the sensible thing. “This has been a very practical letter.	be there all the time to make sure you're being responsible.

the sensible thing	The very next Christmas you would not wear even rubbers, though I begged you. You are nearly twenty years old now, dear, and I can’t be with you constantly to find whether you are doing the sensible thing. “This has been a very practical letter.	the smart thing

lack of money to do the things one wants to makes one quite prosy and domestic, but there is still plenty for everything if we are not too extravagant.	“This has been a very practical letter. I warned you in my last that the lack of money to do the things one wants to makes one quite prosy and domestic, but there is still plenty for everything if we are not too extravagant. Take care of yourself, my dear boy, and do try to write at least once a week, because I imagine all sorts of horrible things if I don’t hear from you.	Not having enough money to do what you want makes you boring and focused on home life, but we have enough if we're careful with our spending.

Take care of yourself, my dear boy, and do try to write at least once a week, because I imagine all sorts of horrible things if I don’t hear from you.	I warned you in my last that the lack of money to do the things one wants to makes one quite prosy and domestic, but there is still plenty for everything if we are not too extravagant. Take care of yourself, my dear boy, and do try to write at least once a week, because I imagine all sorts of horrible things if I don’t hear from you. Affectionately, Mother.”	Take care of yourself, dear, and please write at least once a week, because I start imagining terrible things if I don't hear from you.

Affectionately, Mother	Take care of yourself, my dear boy, and do try to write at least once a week, because I imagine all sorts of horrible things if I don’t hear from you. Affectionately, Mother.”	Love, Mom

week at Christmas, and they had enormous conversations around the open fire.	Monsignor Darcy invited Amory up to the Stuart palace on the Hudson for a week at Christmas, and they had enormous conversations around the open fire. Monsignor was growing a trifle stouter and his personality had expanded even with that, and Amory felt both rest and security in sinking into a squat, cushioned chair and joining him in the middle-aged sanity of a cigar.	a week during Christmas, and they had long talks by the fire.

 Monsignor Darcy	Monsignor Darcy invited Amory up to the Stuart palace on the Hudson for a week at Christmas, and they had enormous conversations around the open fire. Monsignor was growing a trifle stouter and his personality had expanded even with that, and Amory felt both rest and security in sinking into a squat, cushioned chair and joining him in the middle-aged sanity of a cigar.	Monsignor Darcy

the middle-aged sanity	Monsignor Darcy invited Amory up to the Stuart palace on the Hudson for a week at Christmas, and they had enormous conversations around the open fire. Monsignor was growing a trifle stouter and his personality had expanded even with that, and Amory felt both rest and security in sinking into a squat, cushioned chair and joining him in the middle-aged sanity of a cigar. “I’ve felt like leaving college, Monsignor.”	the wisdom of middle age

sanity of a cigar.	Monsignor Darcy invited Amory up to the Stuart palace on the Hudson for a week at Christmas, and they had enormous conversations around the open fire. Monsignor was growing a trifle stouter and his personality had expanded even with that, and Amory felt both rest and security in sinking into a squat, cushioned chair and joining him in the middle-aged sanity of a cigar. “I’ve felt like leaving college, Monsignor.”	the comforting normalcy of smoking a cigar.

a squat, cushioned chair	Monsignor Darcy invited Amory up to the Stuart palace on the Hudson for a week at Christmas, and they had enormous conversations around the open fire. Monsignor was growing a trifle stouter and his personality had expanded even with that, and Amory felt both rest and security in sinking into a squat, cushioned chair and joining him in the middle-aged sanity of a cigar. “I’ve felt like leaving college, Monsignor.”	a short, padded chair

felt like leaving college, Monsignor.”	Monsignor was growing a trifle stouter and his personality had expanded even with that, and Amory felt both rest and security in sinking into a squat, cushioned chair and joining him in the middle-aged sanity of a cigar. “I’ve felt like leaving college, Monsignor.” “Why?”	want to quit college, Monsignor.

gone up in smoke; you think it’s petty and all that, but—” “Not at all petty.	“Why?” “All my career’s gone up in smoke; you think it’s petty and all that, but—” “Not at all petty. I think it’s most important.	destroyed; you think it's unimportant and so on, but—” “Not unimportant at all.

doing since I saw you last.”	I want to hear the whole thing. Everything you’ve been doing since I saw you last.” Amory talked; he went thoroughly into the destruction of his egotistic highways, and in a half-hour the listless quality had left his voice.	doing since I last saw you."

the listless quality	Everything you’ve been doing since I saw you last.” Amory talked; he went thoroughly into the destruction of his egotistic highways, and in a half-hour the listless quality had left his voice. “What would you do if you left college?” asked Monsignor.	the bored tone

his egotistic highways	Everything you’ve been doing since I saw you last.” Amory talked; he went thoroughly into the destruction of his egotistic highways, and in a half-hour the listless quality had left his voice. “What would you do if you left college?” asked Monsignor.	His selfish ways

do if you left college?” asked Monsignor.	Amory talked; he went thoroughly into the destruction of his egotistic highways, and in a half-hour the listless quality had left his voice. “What would you do if you left college?” asked Monsignor. “Don’t know.	do if you left college?

this tiresome war	“Don’t know. I’d like to travel, but of course this tiresome war prevents that. Anyways, mother would hate not having me graduate.	this annoying war

go over with him and join the Lafayette Esquadrille.”	I’m just at sea. Kerry Holiday wants me to go over with him and join the Lafayette Esquadrille.” “You know you wouldn’t like to go.”	go with him and join the Lafayette Escadrille.

the Lafayette Esquadrille	I’m just at sea. Kerry Holiday wants me to go over with him and join the Lafayette Esquadrille.” “You know you wouldn’t like to go.”	the Lafayette Escadrille

tired of life than I think you are.	“Sometimes I would—tonight I’d go in a second.” “Well, you’d have to be very much more tired of life than I think you are. I know you.”	more tired of living than I believe you are.

out of everything—when I think of another useless, draggy year.”	“I’m afraid you do,” agreed Amory reluctantly. “It just seemed an easy way out of everything—when I think of another useless, draggy year.” “Yes, I know; but to tell you the truth, I’m not worried about you; you seem to me to be progressing perfectly naturally.”	out of everything—especially when I think about another pointless, boring year."

another useless, draggy year	“I’m afraid you do,” agreed Amory reluctantly. “It just seemed an easy way out of everything—when I think of another useless, draggy year.” “Yes, I know; but to tell you the truth, I’m not worried about you; you seem to me to be progressing perfectly naturally.”	another pointless, boring year

bit of it!” scoffed Monsignor.	“I’ve lost half my personality in a year.” “Not a bit of it!” scoffed Monsignor. “You’ve lost a great amount of vanity and that’s all.”	Not at all! scoffed Monsignor.

amount of vanity and that’s all.”	“Not a bit of it!” scoffed Monsignor. “You’ve lost a great amount of vanity and that’s all.” “Lordy!	That's just your pride hurting, nothing more.

form at St. Regis’s.”	“Lordy! I feel, anyway, as if I’d gone through another fifth form at St. Regis’s.” “No.”	class at St. Regis's.

be through the channels you were searching last year.”	“That was a misfortune; this has been a good thing. Whatever worth while comes to you, won’t be through the channels you were searching last year.” “What could be more unprofitable than my present lack of pep?”	come from the places you were looking last year.

lack of pep?”	Whatever worth while comes to you, won’t be through the channels you were searching last year.” “What could be more unprofitable than my present lack of pep?” “Perhaps in itself.	lack of energy?

casting off a lot of your old luggage about success and the superman and all.	but you’re developing. This has given you time to think and you’re casting off a lot of your old luggage about success and the superman and all. People like us can’t adopt whole theories, as you did.	Getting rid of your old ideas about success and being perfect.

hour a day to think in, we can accomplish marvels, but as far as any high-handed scheme of blind dominance is concerned—we’d just make asses of ourselves.”	People like us can’t adopt whole theories, as you did. If we can do the next thing, and have an hour a day to think in, we can accomplish marvels, but as far as any high-handed scheme of blind dominance is concerned—we’d just make asses of ourselves.” “But, Monsignor, I can’t do the next thing.”	If we have an hour a day to think, we can achieve amazing things, but if we try any overbearing plan for total control, we'll just make fools of ourselves.

blind dominance	People like us can’t adopt whole theories, as you did. If we can do the next thing, and have an hour a day to think in, we can accomplish marvels, but as far as any high-handed scheme of blind dominance is concerned—we’d just make asses of ourselves.” “But, Monsignor, I can’t do the next thing.”	Unthinking control

Amory, between you and me, I have only just learned to do it myself.	“But, Monsignor, I can’t do the next thing.” “Amory, between you and me, I have only just learned to do it myself. I can do the one hundred things beyond the next thing, but I stub my toe on that, just as you stubbed your toe on mathematics this fall.”	Amory, just between us, I've only recently learned to do it myself.

stubbed your toe on mathematics this fall.”	“Amory, between you and me, I have only just learned to do it myself. I can do the one hundred things beyond the next thing, but I stub my toe on that, just as you stubbed your toe on mathematics this fall.” “Why do we have to do the next thing?	failed at math this fall.

have to do it because we’re not personalities, but personages.”	It never seems the sort of thing I should do.” “We have to do it because we’re not personalities, but personages.” “That’s a good line—what do you mean?”	We have to do it because we're not just people, but important figures.

tell me of evidently are.	“That’s a good line—what do you mean?” “A personality is what you thought you were, what this Kerry and Sloane you tell me of evidently are. Personality is a physical matter almost entirely; it lowers the people it acts on—I’ve seen it vanish in a long sickness.	you're telling me about.

a long sickness	“A personality is what you thought you were, what this Kerry and Sloane you tell me of evidently are. Personality is a physical matter almost entirely; it lowers the people it acts on—I’ve seen it vanish in a long sickness. But while a personality is active, it overrides ‘the next thing.’	a lengthy illness

lowers the people it acts on—I’ve seen it vanish in a long sickness.	“A personality is what you thought you were, what this Kerry and Sloane you tell me of evidently are. Personality is a physical matter almost entirely; it lowers the people it acts on—I’ve seen it vanish in a long sickness. But while a personality is active, it overrides ‘the next thing.’	It has a negative effect on people, and I've seen it disappear after someone's been sick for a long time.

is active, it overrides ‘the next thing.’	Personality is a physical matter almost entirely; it lowers the people it acts on—I’ve seen it vanish in a long sickness. But while a personality is active, it overrides ‘the next thing.’ Now a personage, on the other hand, gathers.	is active, it pushes aside what's coming next.

a long sickness	“A personality is what you thought you were, what this Kerry and Sloane you tell me of evidently are. Personality is a physical matter almost entirely; it lowers the people it acts on—I’ve seen it vanish in a long sickness. But while a personality is active, it overrides ‘the next thing.’	a serious illness

lowers the people it acts on—I’ve seen it vanish in a long sickness.	“A personality is what you thought you were, what this Kerry and Sloane you tell me of evidently are. Personality is a physical matter almost entirely; it lowers the people it acts on—I’ve seen it vanish in a long sickness. But while a personality is active, it overrides ‘the next thing.’	It makes the people it affects feel inferior—I've seen it disappear during a long illness.

is active, it overrides ‘the next thing.’	Personality is a physical matter almost entirely; it lowers the people it acts on—I’ve seen it vanish in a long sickness. But while a personality is active, it overrides ‘the next thing.’ Now a personage, on the other hand, gathers.	When a personality is active, it ignores what comes next.

apart from what he’s done.	Now a personage, on the other hand, gathers. He is never thought of apart from what he’s done. He’s a bar on which a thousand things have been hung—glittering things sometimes, as ours are; but he uses those things with a cold mentality back of them.”	separate from his actions.

a cold mentality	He is never thought of apart from what he’s done. He’s a bar on which a thousand things have been hung—glittering things sometimes, as ours are; but he uses those things with a cold mentality back of them.” “And several of my most glittering possessions had fallen off when I needed them.”	a cold way of thinking

glittering things	He is never thought of apart from what he’s done. He’s a bar on which a thousand things have been hung—glittering things sometimes, as ours are; but he uses those things with a cold mentality back of them.” “And several of my most glittering possessions had fallen off when I needed them.”	Shiny things

fallen off when I needed them.”	He’s a bar on which a thousand things have been hung—glittering things sometimes, as ours are; but he uses those things with a cold mentality back of them.” “And several of my most glittering possessions had fallen off when I needed them.” Amory continued the simile eagerly.	They weren't there when I needed them.

my most glittering possessions	He’s a bar on which a thousand things have been hung—glittering things sometimes, as ours are; but he uses those things with a cold mentality back of them.” “And several of my most glittering possessions had fallen off when I needed them.” Amory continued the simile eagerly.	My most impressive things

your garnered prestige	Amory continued the simile eagerly. “Yes, that’s it; when you feel that your garnered prestige and talents and all that are hung out, you need never bother about anybody; you can cope with them without difficulty.” “But, on the other hand, if I haven’t my possessions, I’m helpless!”	Your earned reputation

bother about anybody; you can cope with them without difficulty.”	Amory continued the simile eagerly. “Yes, that’s it; when you feel that your garnered prestige and talents and all that are hung out, you need never bother about anybody; you can cope with them without difficulty.” “But, on the other hand, if I haven’t my possessions, I’m helpless!”	worry about anyone; you can handle them easily.”

haven’t my possessions, I’m helpless!”	“Yes, that’s it; when you feel that your garnered prestige and talents and all that are hung out, you need never bother about anybody; you can cope with them without difficulty.” “But, on the other hand, if I haven’t my possessions, I’m helpless!” “Absolutely.”	If I don't have my things, I'm helpless!

start—a start Kerry or Sloane can constitutionally never have.	“That’s certainly an idea.” “Now you’ve a clean start—a start Kerry or Sloane can constitutionally never have. You brushed three or four ornaments down, and, in a fit of pique, knocked off the rest of them.	A fresh start—a start that Kerry or Sloane can never have legally.

brushed three or four ornaments down, and, in a fit of pique, knocked off the rest of them.	“Now you’ve a clean start—a start Kerry or Sloane can constitutionally never have. You brushed three or four ornaments down, and, in a fit of pique, knocked off the rest of them. The thing now is to collect some new ones, and the farther you look ahead in the collecting the better.	You knocked three or four decorations off, and then in anger, you knocked the rest of them off.

three or four ornaments	“Now you’ve a clean start—a start Kerry or Sloane can constitutionally never have. You brushed three or four ornaments down, and, in a fit of pique, knocked off the rest of them. The thing now is to collect some new ones, and the farther you look ahead in the collecting the better.	A few decorations

look ahead in the collecting the better.	You brushed three or four ornaments down, and, in a fit of pique, knocked off the rest of them. The thing now is to collect some new ones, and the farther you look ahead in the collecting the better. But remember, do the next thing!”	The sooner you start collecting, the better.

talked, often about themselves, sometimes of philosophy and religion, and life as respectively a game or a mystery.	“How clear you can make things!” So they talked, often about themselves, sometimes of philosophy and religion, and life as respectively a game or a mystery. The priest seemed to guess Amory’s thoughts before they were clear in his own head, so closely related were their minds in form and groove.	They often talked about themselves, sometimes about philosophy and religion, and about whether life was a game or a mystery.

Amory’s thoughts	So they talked, often about themselves, sometimes of philosophy and religion, and life as respectively a game or a mystery. The priest seemed to guess Amory’s thoughts before they were clear in his own head, so closely related were their minds in form and groove. “Why do I make lists?”	Amory's thoughts

were clear in his own head, so closely related were their minds in form and groove.	So they talked, often about themselves, sometimes of philosophy and religion, and life as respectively a game or a mystery. The priest seemed to guess Amory’s thoughts before they were clear in his own head, so closely related were their minds in form and groove. “Why do I make lists?”	were clear in his own head, because their minds were so similar in the way they thought.

passion for classifying and finding a type.”	“We both are. It’s the passion for classifying and finding a type.” “It’s a desire to get something definite.”	Passion for classifying and finding a type.

desire to get something definite.”	It’s the passion for classifying and finding a type.” “It’s a desire to get something definite.” “It’s the nucleus of scholastic philosophy.”	The desire to have something certain.

nucleus of scholastic philosophy.”	“It’s a desire to get something definite.” “It’s the nucleus of scholastic philosophy.” “I was beginning to think I was growing eccentric till I came up here.	The core idea of academic philosophy.

scholastic philosophy	“It’s a desire to get something definite.” “It’s the nucleus of scholastic philosophy.” “I was beginning to think I was growing eccentric till I came up here.	Academic philosophy

more egotistic food	“But do the next thing.” After Amory returned to college he received several letters from Monsignor which gave him more egotistic food for consumption. I am afraid that I gave you too much assurance of your inevitable safety, and you must remember that I did that through faith in your springs of effort; not in the silly conviction that you will arrive without struggle.	More things to feed his ego.

returned to college he received several letters from Monsignor which gave him more egotistic food for consumption.	“But do the next thing.” After Amory returned to college he received several letters from Monsignor which gave him more egotistic food for consumption. I am afraid that I gave you too much assurance of your inevitable safety, and you must remember that I did that through faith in your springs of effort; not in the silly conviction that you will arrive without struggle.	He got some letters from Monsignor after he went back to college, and they made him feel more self-important.

your inevitable safety	After Amory returned to college he received several letters from Monsignor which gave him more egotistic food for consumption. I am afraid that I gave you too much assurance of your inevitable safety, and you must remember that I did that through faith in your springs of effort; not in the silly conviction that you will arrive without struggle. Some nuances of character you will have to take for granted in yourself, though you must be careful in confessing them to others.	That you will definitely be safe

faith in your springs of effort; not in the silly conviction that you will arrive without struggle.	After Amory returned to college he received several letters from Monsignor which gave him more egotistic food for consumption. I am afraid that I gave you too much assurance of your inevitable safety, and you must remember that I did that through faith in your springs of effort; not in the silly conviction that you will arrive without struggle. Some nuances of character you will have to take for granted in yourself, though you must be careful in confessing them to others.	Believing in your drive to work hard, not in the foolish idea that you'll succeed without trying.

careful in confessing them to others.	I am afraid that I gave you too much assurance of your inevitable safety, and you must remember that I did that through faith in your springs of effort; not in the silly conviction that you will arrive without struggle. Some nuances of character you will have to take for granted in yourself, though you must be careful in confessing them to others. You are unsentimental, almost incapable of affection, astute without being cunning and vain without being proud.	You should be careful about telling other people about them.

vain without being proud.	Some nuances of character you will have to take for granted in yourself, though you must be careful in confessing them to others. You are unsentimental, almost incapable of affection, astute without being cunning and vain without being proud. Don’t let yourself feel worthless; often through life you will really be at your worst when you seem to think best of yourself; and don’t worry about losing your “personality,” as you persist in calling it; at fifteen you had the radiance of early morning, at twenty you will begin to have the melancholy brilliance of the moon, and when you are my age you will give out, as I do, the genial golden warmth of 4 p.m. If you write me letters, please let them be natural ones.	You like to think highly of yourself, but you don't brag about it.

4 p.m.	You are unsentimental, almost incapable of affection, astute without being cunning and vain without being proud. Don’t let yourself feel worthless; often through life you will really be at your worst when you seem to think best of yourself; and don’t worry about losing your “personality,” as you persist in calling it; at fifteen you had the radiance of early morning, at twenty you will begin to have the melancholy brilliance of the moon, and when you are my age you will give out, as I do, the genial golden warmth of 4 p.m. If you write me letters, please let them be natural ones. Your last, that dissertation on architecture, was perfectly awful—so “highbrow” that I picture you living in an intellectual and emotional vacuum; and beware of trying to classify people too definitely into types; you will find that all through their youth they will persist annoyingly in jumping from class to class, and by pasting a supercilious label on everyone you meet you are merely packing a jack-in-the-box that will spring up and leer at you when you begin to come into really antagonistic contact with the world.	4 p.m.

the genial golden warmth	You are unsentimental, almost incapable of affection, astute without being cunning and vain without being proud. Don’t let yourself feel worthless; often through life you will really be at your worst when you seem to think best of yourself; and don’t worry about losing your “personality,” as you persist in calling it; at fifteen you had the radiance of early morning, at twenty you will begin to have the melancholy brilliance of the moon, and when you are my age you will give out, as I do, the genial golden warmth of 4 p.m. If you write me letters, please let them be natural ones. Your last, that dissertation on architecture, was perfectly awful—so “highbrow” that I picture you living in an intellectual and emotional vacuum; and beware of trying to classify people too definitely into types; you will find that all through their youth they will persist annoyingly in jumping from class to class, and by pasting a supercilious label on everyone you meet you are merely packing a jack-in-the-box that will spring up and leer at you when you begin to come into really antagonistic contact with the world.	the friendly, golden warmth

the melancholy brilliance	You are unsentimental, almost incapable of affection, astute without being cunning and vain without being proud. Don’t let yourself feel worthless; often through life you will really be at your worst when you seem to think best of yourself; and don’t worry about losing your “personality,” as you persist in calling it; at fifteen you had the radiance of early morning, at twenty you will begin to have the melancholy brilliance of the moon, and when you are my age you will give out, as I do, the genial golden warmth of 4 p.m. If you write me letters, please let them be natural ones. Your last, that dissertation on architecture, was perfectly awful—so “highbrow” that I picture you living in an intellectual and emotional vacuum; and beware of trying to classify people too definitely into types; you will find that all through their youth they will persist annoyingly in jumping from class to class, and by pasting a supercilious label on everyone you meet you are merely packing a jack-in-the-box that will spring up and leer at you when you begin to come into really antagonistic contact with the world.	The sad brightness

brilliance of the moon, and when you are my age you will give out, as I do, the genial golden warmth of 4 p.m. If you write me letters, please let them be natural ones.	You are unsentimental, almost incapable of affection, astute without being cunning and vain without being proud. Don’t let yourself feel worthless; often through life you will really be at your worst when you seem to think best of yourself; and don’t worry about losing your “personality,” as you persist in calling it; at fifteen you had the radiance of early morning, at twenty you will begin to have the melancholy brilliance of the moon, and when you are my age you will give out, as I do, the genial golden warmth of 4 p.m. If you write me letters, please let them be natural ones. Your last, that dissertation on architecture, was perfectly awful—so “highbrow” that I picture you living in an intellectual and emotional vacuum; and beware of trying to classify people too definitely into types; you will find that all through their youth they will persist annoyingly in jumping from class to class, and by pasting a supercilious label on everyone you meet you are merely packing a jack-in-the-box that will spring up and leer at you when you begin to come into really antagonistic contact with the world.	moon's brightness, and when you're my age, you'll have the warm, friendly glow of late afternoon, just like me. If you write to me, please be yourself.

really antagonistic contact	Don’t let yourself feel worthless; often through life you will really be at your worst when you seem to think best of yourself; and don’t worry about losing your “personality,” as you persist in calling it; at fifteen you had the radiance of early morning, at twenty you will begin to have the melancholy brilliance of the moon, and when you are my age you will give out, as I do, the genial golden warmth of 4 p.m. If you write me letters, please let them be natural ones. Your last, that dissertation on architecture, was perfectly awful—so “highbrow” that I picture you living in an intellectual and emotional vacuum; and beware of trying to classify people too definitely into types; you will find that all through their youth they will persist annoyingly in jumping from class to class, and by pasting a supercilious label on everyone you meet you are merely packing a jack-in-the-box that will spring up and leer at you when you begin to come into really antagonistic contact with the world. An idealization of some such a man as Leonardo da Vinci would be a more valuable beacon to you at present.	When you start to have a real conflict

a supercilious label	Don’t let yourself feel worthless; often through life you will really be at your worst when you seem to think best of yourself; and don’t worry about losing your “personality,” as you persist in calling it; at fifteen you had the radiance of early morning, at twenty you will begin to have the melancholy brilliance of the moon, and when you are my age you will give out, as I do, the genial golden warmth of 4 p.m. If you write me letters, please let them be natural ones. Your last, that dissertation on architecture, was perfectly awful—so “highbrow” that I picture you living in an intellectual and emotional vacuum; and beware of trying to classify people too definitely into types; you will find that all through their youth they will persist annoyingly in jumping from class to class, and by pasting a supercilious label on everyone you meet you are merely packing a jack-in-the-box that will spring up and leer at you when you begin to come into really antagonistic contact with the world. An idealization of some such a man as Leonardo da Vinci would be a more valuable beacon to you at present.	A snobby label

come into really antagonistic contact with the world.	Don’t let yourself feel worthless; often through life you will really be at your worst when you seem to think best of yourself; and don’t worry about losing your “personality,” as you persist in calling it; at fifteen you had the radiance of early morning, at twenty you will begin to have the melancholy brilliance of the moon, and when you are my age you will give out, as I do, the genial golden warmth of 4 p.m. If you write me letters, please let them be natural ones. Your last, that dissertation on architecture, was perfectly awful—so “highbrow” that I picture you living in an intellectual and emotional vacuum; and beware of trying to classify people too definitely into types; you will find that all through their youth they will persist annoyingly in jumping from class to class, and by pasting a supercilious label on everyone you meet you are merely packing a jack-in-the-box that will spring up and leer at you when you begin to come into really antagonistic contact with the world. An idealization of some such a man as Leonardo da Vinci would be a more valuable beacon to you at present.	begin to have real conflicts with the world.

an intellectual and emotional vacuum	Don’t let yourself feel worthless; often through life you will really be at your worst when you seem to think best of yourself; and don’t worry about losing your “personality,” as you persist in calling it; at fifteen you had the radiance of early morning, at twenty you will begin to have the melancholy brilliance of the moon, and when you are my age you will give out, as I do, the genial golden warmth of 4 p.m. If you write me letters, please let them be natural ones. Your last, that dissertation on architecture, was perfectly awful—so “highbrow” that I picture you living in an intellectual and emotional vacuum; and beware of trying to classify people too definitely into types; you will find that all through their youth they will persist annoyingly in jumping from class to class, and by pasting a supercilious label on everyone you meet you are merely packing a jack-in-the-box that will spring up and leer at you when you begin to come into really antagonistic contact with the world. An idealization of some such a man as Leonardo da Vinci would be a more valuable beacon to you at present.	a lack of intelligence and feeling

a more valuable beacon	Your last, that dissertation on architecture, was perfectly awful—so “highbrow” that I picture you living in an intellectual and emotional vacuum; and beware of trying to classify people too definitely into types; you will find that all through their youth they will persist annoyingly in jumping from class to class, and by pasting a supercilious label on everyone you meet you are merely packing a jack-in-the-box that will spring up and leer at you when you begin to come into really antagonistic contact with the world. An idealization of some such a man as Leonardo da Vinci would be a more valuable beacon to you at present. You are bound to go up and down, just as I did in my youth, but do keep your clarity of mind, and if fools or sages dare to criticise don’t blame yourself too much.	a more helpful guide

be a more valuable beacon to you at present.	Your last, that dissertation on architecture, was perfectly awful—so “highbrow” that I picture you living in an intellectual and emotional vacuum; and beware of trying to classify people too definitely into types; you will find that all through their youth they will persist annoyingly in jumping from class to class, and by pasting a supercilious label on everyone you meet you are merely packing a jack-in-the-box that will spring up and leer at you when you begin to come into really antagonistic contact with the world. An idealization of some such a man as Leonardo da Vinci would be a more valuable beacon to you at present. You are bound to go up and down, just as I did in my youth, but do keep your clarity of mind, and if fools or sages dare to criticise don’t blame yourself too much.	be a more helpful guide for you now.

did in my youth, but do keep your clarity of mind, and if fools or sages dare to criticise don’t blame yourself too much.	An idealization of some such a man as Leonardo da Vinci would be a more valuable beacon to you at present. You are bound to go up and down, just as I did in my youth, but do keep your clarity of mind, and if fools or sages dare to criticise don’t blame yourself too much. You say that convention is all that really keeps you straight in this “woman proposition”; but it’s more than that, Amory; it’s the fear that what you begin you can’t stop; you would run amuck, and I know whereof I speak; it’s that half-miraculous sixth sense by which you detect evil, it’s the half-realized fear of God in your heart.	did in my youth, but keep your clear thinking, and if fools or wise people criticize, don't be too hard on yourself.

that half-miraculous sixth sense	You are bound to go up and down, just as I did in my youth, but do keep your clarity of mind, and if fools or sages dare to criticise don’t blame yourself too much. You say that convention is all that really keeps you straight in this “woman proposition”; but it’s more than that, Amory; it’s the fear that what you begin you can’t stop; you would run amuck, and I know whereof I speak; it’s that half-miraculous sixth sense by which you detect evil, it’s the half-realized fear of God in your heart. Whatever your métier proves to be—religion, architecture, literature—I’m sure you would be much safer anchored to the Church, but I won’t risk my influence by arguing with you even though I am secretly sure that the “black chasm of Romanism” yawns beneath you.	That incredible intuition

all that really keeps you straight in this “woman proposition”; but it’s more than that, Amory; it’s the fear that what you begin you can’t stop; you would run amuck, and I know whereof I speak; it’s that half-miraculous sixth sense by which you detect evil, it’s the half-realized fear of God in your heart.	You are bound to go up and down, just as I did in my youth, but do keep your clarity of mind, and if fools or sages dare to criticise don’t blame yourself too much. You say that convention is all that really keeps you straight in this “woman proposition”; but it’s more than that, Amory; it’s the fear that what you begin you can’t stop; you would run amuck, and I know whereof I speak; it’s that half-miraculous sixth sense by which you detect evil, it’s the half-realized fear of God in your heart. Whatever your métier proves to be—religion, architecture, literature—I’m sure you would be much safer anchored to the Church, but I won’t risk my influence by arguing with you even though I am secretly sure that the “black chasm of Romanism” yawns beneath you.	What really keeps you in line with women isn't just that, Amory; it's also the fear that you won't be able to stop once you start. You could lose control, and I know what I'm talking about. It's that almost magical intuition that helps you recognize bad things, and it's the vague fear of God you have.

yawns beneath you.	You say that convention is all that really keeps you straight in this “woman proposition”; but it’s more than that, Amory; it’s the fear that what you begin you can’t stop; you would run amuck, and I know whereof I speak; it’s that half-miraculous sixth sense by which you detect evil, it’s the half-realized fear of God in your heart. Whatever your métier proves to be—religion, architecture, literature—I’m sure you would be much safer anchored to the Church, but I won’t risk my influence by arguing with you even though I am secretly sure that the “black chasm of Romanism” yawns beneath you. Do write me soon.	is ready to swallow you.

the “black chasm	You say that convention is all that really keeps you straight in this “woman proposition”; but it’s more than that, Amory; it’s the fear that what you begin you can’t stop; you would run amuck, and I know whereof I speak; it’s that half-miraculous sixth sense by which you detect evil, it’s the half-realized fear of God in your heart. Whatever your métier proves to be—religion, architecture, literature—I’m sure you would be much safer anchored to the Church, but I won’t risk my influence by arguing with you even though I am secretly sure that the “black chasm of Romanism” yawns beneath you. Do write me soon.	the "black abyss"

affectionate regards	Do write me soon. With affectionate regards, Thayer Darcy. Even Amory’s reading paled during this period; he delved further into the misty side streets of literature: Huysmans, Walter Pater, Theophile Gautier, and the racier sections of Rabelais, Boccaccio, Petronius, and Suetonius.	Love

the misty side streets	With affectionate regards, Thayer Darcy. Even Amory’s reading paled during this period; he delved further into the misty side streets of literature: Huysmans, Walter Pater, Theophile Gautier, and the racier sections of Rabelais, Boccaccio, Petronius, and Suetonius. One week, through general curiosity, he inspected the private libraries of his classmates and found Sloane’s as typical as any: sets of Kipling, O. Henry, John Fox, Jr., and Richard Harding Davis; What Every Middle-Aged Woman Ought to Know, The Spell of the Yukon; a “gift” copy of James Whitcomb Riley, an assortment of battered, annotated schoolbooks, and, finally, to his surprise, one of his own late discoveries, the collected poems of Rupert Brooke.	the obscure or less known parts

paled during this period; he delved further into the misty side streets of literature: Huysmans, Walter Pater, Theophile Gautier, and the racier sections of Rabelais, Boccaccio, Petronius, and Suetonius.	With affectionate regards, Thayer Darcy. Even Amory’s reading paled during this period; he delved further into the misty side streets of literature: Huysmans, Walter Pater, Theophile Gautier, and the racier sections of Rabelais, Boccaccio, Petronius, and Suetonius. One week, through general curiosity, he inspected the private libraries of his classmates and found Sloane’s as typical as any: sets of Kipling, O. Henry, John Fox, Jr., and Richard Harding Davis; What Every Middle-Aged Woman Ought to Know, The Spell of the Yukon; a “gift” copy of James Whitcomb Riley, an assortment of battered, annotated schoolbooks, and, finally, to his surprise, one of his own late discoveries, the collected poems of Rupert Brooke.	became less interested during this time; he explored the obscure and less popular areas of literature: Huysmans, Walter Pater, Theophile Gautier, and the more explicit parts of Rabelais, Boccaccio, Petronius, and Suetonius.

Even Amory’s reading	With affectionate regards, Thayer Darcy. Even Amory’s reading paled during this period; he delved further into the misty side streets of literature: Huysmans, Walter Pater, Theophile Gautier, and the racier sections of Rabelais, Boccaccio, Petronius, and Suetonius. One week, through general curiosity, he inspected the private libraries of his classmates and found Sloane’s as typical as any: sets of Kipling, O. Henry, John Fox, Jr., and Richard Harding Davis; What Every Middle-Aged Woman Ought to Know, The Spell of the Yukon; a “gift” copy of James Whitcomb Riley, an assortment of battered, annotated schoolbooks, and, finally, to his surprise, one of his own late discoveries, the collected poems of Rupert Brooke.	Even Amory's reading

general curiosity	Even Amory’s reading paled during this period; he delved further into the misty side streets of literature: Huysmans, Walter Pater, Theophile Gautier, and the racier sections of Rabelais, Boccaccio, Petronius, and Suetonius. One week, through general curiosity, he inspected the private libraries of his classmates and found Sloane’s as typical as any: sets of Kipling, O. Henry, John Fox, Jr., and Richard Harding Davis; What Every Middle-Aged Woman Ought to Know, The Spell of the Yukon; a “gift” copy of James Whitcomb Riley, an assortment of battered, annotated schoolbooks, and, finally, to his surprise, one of his own late discoveries, the collected poems of Rupert Brooke. Together with Tom D’Invilliers, he sought among the lights of Princeton for someone who might found the Great American Poetic Tradition.	Just curiosity

battered, annotated schoolbooks	Even Amory’s reading paled during this period; he delved further into the misty side streets of literature: Huysmans, Walter Pater, Theophile Gautier, and the racier sections of Rabelais, Boccaccio, Petronius, and Suetonius. One week, through general curiosity, he inspected the private libraries of his classmates and found Sloane’s as typical as any: sets of Kipling, O. Henry, John Fox, Jr., and Richard Harding Davis; What Every Middle-Aged Woman Ought to Know, The Spell of the Yukon; a “gift” copy of James Whitcomb Riley, an assortment of battered, annotated schoolbooks, and, finally, to his surprise, one of his own late discoveries, the collected poems of Rupert Brooke. Together with Tom D’Invilliers, he sought among the lights of Princeton for someone who might found the Great American Poetic Tradition.	Damaged and marked-up textbooks

, Jr.	Even Amory’s reading paled during this period; he delved further into the misty side streets of literature: Huysmans, Walter Pater, Theophile Gautier, and the racier sections of Rabelais, Boccaccio, Petronius, and Suetonius. One week, through general curiosity, he inspected the private libraries of his classmates and found Sloane’s as typical as any: sets of Kipling, O. Henry, John Fox, Jr., and Richard Harding Davis; What Every Middle-Aged Woman Ought to Know, The Spell of the Yukon; a “gift” copy of James Whitcomb Riley, an assortment of battered, annotated schoolbooks, and, finally, to his surprise, one of his own late discoveries, the collected poems of Rupert Brooke. Together with Tom D’Invilliers, he sought among the lights of Princeton for someone who might found the Great American Poetic Tradition.	, Jr.

Fox, Jr., and Richard Harding Davis; What Every Middle-Aged Woman Ought to Know, The Spell of the Yukon; a “gift” copy of James Whitcomb Riley, an assortment of battered, annotated schoolbooks, and, finally, to his surprise, one of his own late discoveries, the collected poems of Rupert Brooke.	Even Amory’s reading paled during this period; he delved further into the misty side streets of literature: Huysmans, Walter Pater, Theophile Gautier, and the racier sections of Rabelais, Boccaccio, Petronius, and Suetonius. One week, through general curiosity, he inspected the private libraries of his classmates and found Sloane’s as typical as any: sets of Kipling, O. Henry, John Fox, Jr., and Richard Harding Davis; What Every Middle-Aged Woman Ought to Know, The Spell of the Yukon; a “gift” copy of James Whitcomb Riley, an assortment of battered, annotated schoolbooks, and, finally, to his surprise, one of his own late discoveries, the collected poems of Rupert Brooke. Together with Tom D’Invilliers, he sought among the lights of Princeton for someone who might found the Great American Poetic Tradition.	Fox, Jr., and Richard Harding Davis; What Every Middle-Aged Woman Ought to Know, The Spell of the Yukon; a "gift" copy of James Whitcomb Riley, a collection of damaged, annotated schoolbooks, and, finally, to his surprise, one of his own recent discoveries, the collected poems of Rupert Brooke.

the Great American Poetic Tradition	One week, through general curiosity, he inspected the private libraries of his classmates and found Sloane’s as typical as any: sets of Kipling, O. Henry, John Fox, Jr., and Richard Harding Davis; What Every Middle-Aged Woman Ought to Know, The Spell of the Yukon; a “gift” copy of James Whitcomb Riley, an assortment of battered, annotated schoolbooks, and, finally, to his surprise, one of his own late discoveries, the collected poems of Rupert Brooke. Together with Tom D’Invilliers, he sought among the lights of Princeton for someone who might found the Great American Poetic Tradition. The undergraduate body itself was rather more interesting that year than had been the entirely Philistine Princeton of two years before.	The tradition of great American poetry

sought among the lights of Princeton for someone who might found the Great American Poetic Tradition.	One week, through general curiosity, he inspected the private libraries of his classmates and found Sloane’s as typical as any: sets of Kipling, O. Henry, John Fox, Jr., and Richard Harding Davis; What Every Middle-Aged Woman Ought to Know, The Spell of the Yukon; a “gift” copy of James Whitcomb Riley, an assortment of battered, annotated schoolbooks, and, finally, to his surprise, one of his own late discoveries, the collected poems of Rupert Brooke. Together with Tom D’Invilliers, he sought among the lights of Princeton for someone who might found the Great American Poetic Tradition. The undergraduate body itself was rather more interesting that year than had been the entirely Philistine Princeton of two years before.	looked among the most talented people at Princeton to find someone who could start the Great American Poetic Tradition.

Tom D’Invilliers	One week, through general curiosity, he inspected the private libraries of his classmates and found Sloane’s as typical as any: sets of Kipling, O. Henry, John Fox, Jr., and Richard Harding Davis; What Every Middle-Aged Woman Ought to Know, The Spell of the Yukon; a “gift” copy of James Whitcomb Riley, an assortment of battered, annotated schoolbooks, and, finally, to his surprise, one of his own late discoveries, the collected poems of Rupert Brooke. Together with Tom D’Invilliers, he sought among the lights of Princeton for someone who might found the Great American Poetic Tradition. The undergraduate body itself was rather more interesting that year than had been the entirely Philistine Princeton of two years before.	Tom D'Invilliers

been the entirely Philistine Princeton of two years before.	Together with Tom D’Invilliers, he sought among the lights of Princeton for someone who might found the Great American Poetic Tradition. The undergraduate body itself was rather more interesting that year than had been the entirely Philistine Princeton of two years before. Things had livened surprisingly, though at the sacrifice of much of the spontaneous charm of freshman year.	had been the completely uncultured Princeton of two years earlier.

the entirely Philistine Princeton	Together with Tom D’Invilliers, he sought among the lights of Princeton for someone who might found the Great American Poetic Tradition. The undergraduate body itself was rather more interesting that year than had been the entirely Philistine Princeton of two years before. Things had livened surprisingly, though at the sacrifice of much of the spontaneous charm of freshman year.	Princeton, which was completely uninterested in art and culture

much of the spontaneous charm of freshman year.	The undergraduate body itself was rather more interesting that year than had been the entirely Philistine Princeton of two years before. Things had livened surprisingly, though at the sacrifice of much of the spontaneous charm of freshman year. In the old Princeton they would never have discovered Tanaduke Wylie.	a lot of the natural appeal of the first year of college.

the spontaneous charm	The undergraduate body itself was rather more interesting that year than had been the entirely Philistine Princeton of two years before. Things had livened surprisingly, though at the sacrifice of much of the spontaneous charm of freshman year. In the old Princeton they would never have discovered Tanaduke Wylie.	The natural charm

freshman year	The undergraduate body itself was rather more interesting that year than had been the entirely Philistine Princeton of two years before. Things had livened surprisingly, though at the sacrifice of much of the spontaneous charm of freshman year. In the old Princeton they would never have discovered Tanaduke Wylie.	First year of college

discovered Tanaduke Wylie.	Things had livened surprisingly, though at the sacrifice of much of the spontaneous charm of freshman year. In the old Princeton they would never have discovered Tanaduke Wylie. Tanaduke was a sophomore, with tremendous ears and a way of saying, “The earth swirls down through the ominous moons of preconsidered generations!”	found Tanaduke Wylie.

the ominous moons	In the old Princeton they would never have discovered Tanaduke Wylie. Tanaduke was a sophomore, with tremendous ears and a way of saying, “The earth swirls down through the ominous moons of preconsidered generations!” that made them vaguely wonder why it did not sound quite clear, but never question that it was the utterance of a supersoul.	the scary moons

preconsidered generations	In the old Princeton they would never have discovered Tanaduke Wylie. Tanaduke was a sophomore, with tremendous ears and a way of saying, “The earth swirls down through the ominous moons of preconsidered generations!” that made them vaguely wonder why it did not sound quite clear, but never question that it was the utterance of a supersoul.	Earlier generations

way of saying, “The earth swirls down through the ominous moons of preconsidered generations!”	In the old Princeton they would never have discovered Tanaduke Wylie. Tanaduke was a sophomore, with tremendous ears and a way of saying, “The earth swirls down through the ominous moons of preconsidered generations!” that made them vaguely wonder why it did not sound quite clear, but never question that it was the utterance of a supersoul.	a way of saying, "The earth spins down through the threatening moons of past generations!"

utterance of a supersoul.	Tanaduke was a sophomore, with tremendous ears and a way of saying, “The earth swirls down through the ominous moons of preconsidered generations!” that made them vaguely wonder why it did not sound quite clear, but never question that it was the utterance of a supersoul. At least so Tom and Amory took him.	something a super intelligent being said.

mind like Shelley’s, and featured his ultrafree free verse and prose poetry in the Nassau Literary Magazine.	At least so Tom and Amory took him. They told him in all earnestness that he had a mind like Shelley’s, and featured his ultrafree free verse and prose poetry in the Nassau Literary Magazine. But Tanaduke’s genius absorbed the many colors of the age, and he took to the Bohemian life, to their great disappointment.	mind like Shelley's, and published his very experimental free verse and prose poetry in the Nassau Literary Magazine.

prose poetry	At least so Tom and Amory took him. They told him in all earnestness that he had a mind like Shelley’s, and featured his ultrafree free verse and prose poetry in the Nassau Literary Magazine. But Tanaduke’s genius absorbed the many colors of the age, and he took to the Bohemian life, to their great disappointment.	Prose poetry

the Nassau Literary Magazine	At least so Tom and Amory took him. They told him in all earnestness that he had a mind like Shelley’s, and featured his ultrafree free verse and prose poetry in the Nassau Literary Magazine. But Tanaduke’s genius absorbed the many colors of the age, and he took to the Bohemian life, to their great disappointment.	the Nassau Literary Magazine

his ultrafree free verse	At least so Tom and Amory took him. They told him in all earnestness that he had a mind like Shelley’s, and featured his ultrafree free verse and prose poetry in the Nassau Literary Magazine. But Tanaduke’s genius absorbed the many colors of the age, and he took to the Bohemian life, to their great disappointment.	his very modern poetry

took to the Bohemian life, to their great disappointment.	They told him in all earnestness that he had a mind like Shelley’s, and featured his ultrafree free verse and prose poetry in the Nassau Literary Magazine. But Tanaduke’s genius absorbed the many colors of the age, and he took to the Bohemian life, to their great disappointment. He talked of Greenwich Village now instead of “noon-swirled moons,” and met winter muses, unacademic, and cloistered by Forty-second Street and Broadway, instead of the Shelleyan dream-children with whom he had regaled their expectant appreciation.	He adopted the Bohemian lifestyle, which greatly disappointed them.

their great disappointment	They told him in all earnestness that he had a mind like Shelley’s, and featured his ultrafree free verse and prose poetry in the Nassau Literary Magazine. But Tanaduke’s genius absorbed the many colors of the age, and he took to the Bohemian life, to their great disappointment. He talked of Greenwich Village now instead of “noon-swirled moons,” and met winter muses, unacademic, and cloistered by Forty-second Street and Broadway, instead of the Shelleyan dream-children with whom he had regaled their expectant appreciation.	They were very disappointed.

Tanaduke’s genius	They told him in all earnestness that he had a mind like Shelley’s, and featured his ultrafree free verse and prose poetry in the Nassau Literary Magazine. But Tanaduke’s genius absorbed the many colors of the age, and he took to the Bohemian life, to their great disappointment. He talked of Greenwich Village now instead of “noon-swirled moons,” and met winter muses, unacademic, and cloistered by Forty-second Street and Broadway, instead of the Shelleyan dream-children with whom he had regaled their expectant appreciation.	Tanaduke's talent

the Bohemian life	They told him in all earnestness that he had a mind like Shelley’s, and featured his ultrafree free verse and prose poetry in the Nassau Literary Magazine. But Tanaduke’s genius absorbed the many colors of the age, and he took to the Bohemian life, to their great disappointment. He talked of Greenwich Village now instead of “noon-swirled moons,” and met winter muses, unacademic, and cloistered by Forty-second Street and Broadway, instead of the Shelleyan dream-children with whom he had regaled their expectant appreciation.	the unconventional lifestyle

children with whom he had regaled their expectant appreciation.	But Tanaduke’s genius absorbed the many colors of the age, and he took to the Bohemian life, to their great disappointment. He talked of Greenwich Village now instead of “noon-swirled moons,” and met winter muses, unacademic, and cloistered by Forty-second Street and Broadway, instead of the Shelleyan dream-children with whom he had regaled their expectant appreciation. So they surrendered Tanaduke to the futurists, deciding that he and his flaming ties would do better there.	children he used to entertain, expecting their admiration.

winter muses	But Tanaduke’s genius absorbed the many colors of the age, and he took to the Bohemian life, to their great disappointment. He talked of Greenwich Village now instead of “noon-swirled moons,” and met winter muses, unacademic, and cloistered by Forty-second Street and Broadway, instead of the Shelleyan dream-children with whom he had regaled their expectant appreciation. So they surrendered Tanaduke to the futurists, deciding that he and his flaming ties would do better there.	Modern muses

their expectant appreciation	But Tanaduke’s genius absorbed the many colors of the age, and he took to the Bohemian life, to their great disappointment. He talked of Greenwich Village now instead of “noon-swirled moons,” and met winter muses, unacademic, and cloistered by Forty-second Street and Broadway, instead of the Shelleyan dream-children with whom he had regaled their expectant appreciation. So they surrendered Tanaduke to the futurists, deciding that he and his flaming ties would do better there.	their hopes

the Shelleyan dream-children	But Tanaduke’s genius absorbed the many colors of the age, and he took to the Bohemian life, to their great disappointment. He talked of Greenwich Village now instead of “noon-swirled moons,” and met winter muses, unacademic, and cloistered by Forty-second Street and Broadway, instead of the Shelleyan dream-children with whom he had regaled their expectant appreciation. So they surrendered Tanaduke to the futurists, deciding that he and his flaming ties would do better there.	the imaginative and romantic friends

“noon-swirled moons	But Tanaduke’s genius absorbed the many colors of the age, and he took to the Bohemian life, to their great disappointment. He talked of Greenwich Village now instead of “noon-swirled moons,” and met winter muses, unacademic, and cloistered by Forty-second Street and Broadway, instead of the Shelleyan dream-children with whom he had regaled their expectant appreciation. So they surrendered Tanaduke to the futurists, deciding that he and his flaming ties would do better there.	"moons swirling at noon"

surrendered Tanaduke to the futurists, deciding that he and his flaming ties would do better there.	He talked of Greenwich Village now instead of “noon-swirled moons,” and met winter muses, unacademic, and cloistered by Forty-second Street and Broadway, instead of the Shelleyan dream-children with whom he had regaled their expectant appreciation. So they surrendered Tanaduke to the futurists, deciding that he and his flaming ties would do better there. Tom gave him the final advice that he should stop writing for two years and read the complete works of Alexander Pope four times, but on Amory’s suggestion that Pope for Tanaduke was like foot-ease for stomach trouble, they withdrew in laughter, and called it a coin’s toss whether this genius was too big or too petty for them.	They let Tanaduke go to the futurists, thinking he and his flashy ties would fit in better with them.

Amory’s suggestion	So they surrendered Tanaduke to the futurists, deciding that he and his flaming ties would do better there. Tom gave him the final advice that he should stop writing for two years and read the complete works of Alexander Pope four times, but on Amory’s suggestion that Pope for Tanaduke was like foot-ease for stomach trouble, they withdrew in laughter, and called it a coin’s toss whether this genius was too big or too petty for them. Amory rather scornfully avoided the popular professors who dispensed easy epigrams and thimblefuls of Chartreuse to groups of admirers every night.	Amory suggested

was too big or too petty for them.	So they surrendered Tanaduke to the futurists, deciding that he and his flaming ties would do better there. Tom gave him the final advice that he should stop writing for two years and read the complete works of Alexander Pope four times, but on Amory’s suggestion that Pope for Tanaduke was like foot-ease for stomach trouble, they withdrew in laughter, and called it a coin’s toss whether this genius was too big or too petty for them. Amory rather scornfully avoided the popular professors who dispensed easy epigrams and thimblefuls of Chartreuse to groups of admirers every night.	was either too great or too insignificant for them.

easy epigrams	Tom gave him the final advice that he should stop writing for two years and read the complete works of Alexander Pope four times, but on Amory’s suggestion that Pope for Tanaduke was like foot-ease for stomach trouble, they withdrew in laughter, and called it a coin’s toss whether this genius was too big or too petty for them. Amory rather scornfully avoided the popular professors who dispensed easy epigrams and thimblefuls of Chartreuse to groups of admirers every night. He was disappointed, too, at the air of general uncertainty on every subject that seemed linked with the pedantic temperament; his opinions took shape in a miniature satire called “In a Lecture-Room,” which he persuaded Tom to print in the Nassau Lit.	clever sayings

dispensed easy epigrams and thimblefuls of Chartreuse to groups of admirers every night.	Tom gave him the final advice that he should stop writing for two years and read the complete works of Alexander Pope four times, but on Amory’s suggestion that Pope for Tanaduke was like foot-ease for stomach trouble, they withdrew in laughter, and called it a coin’s toss whether this genius was too big or too petty for them. Amory rather scornfully avoided the popular professors who dispensed easy epigrams and thimblefuls of Chartreuse to groups of admirers every night. He was disappointed, too, at the air of general uncertainty on every subject that seemed linked with the pedantic temperament; his opinions took shape in a miniature satire called “In a Lecture-Room,” which he persuaded Tom to print in the Nassau Lit.	gave out simple clever sayings and tiny drinks of Chartreuse to groups of fans every night.

the Nassau Lit	Amory rather scornfully avoided the popular professors who dispensed easy epigrams and thimblefuls of Chartreuse to groups of admirers every night. He was disappointed, too, at the air of general uncertainty on every subject that seemed linked with the pedantic temperament; his opinions took shape in a miniature satire called “In a Lecture-Room,” which he persuaded Tom to print in the Nassau Lit. “Good morning, Fool.	The Nassau Lit (a literary magazine)

a miniature satire	Amory rather scornfully avoided the popular professors who dispensed easy epigrams and thimblefuls of Chartreuse to groups of admirers every night. He was disappointed, too, at the air of general uncertainty on every subject that seemed linked with the pedantic temperament; his opinions took shape in a miniature satire called “In a Lecture-Room,” which he persuaded Tom to print in the Nassau Lit. “Good morning, Fool.	a short, funny story

Room,” which he persuaded Tom to print in the Nassau Lit.	Amory rather scornfully avoided the popular professors who dispensed easy epigrams and thimblefuls of Chartreuse to groups of admirers every night. He was disappointed, too, at the air of general uncertainty on every subject that seemed linked with the pedantic temperament; his opinions took shape in a miniature satire called “In a Lecture-Room,” which he persuaded Tom to print in the Nassau Lit. “Good morning, Fool.	"In a Lecture-Room," which he persuaded Tom to print in the Nassau Lit.

the pedantic temperament	Amory rather scornfully avoided the popular professors who dispensed easy epigrams and thimblefuls of Chartreuse to groups of admirers every night. He was disappointed, too, at the air of general uncertainty on every subject that seemed linked with the pedantic temperament; his opinions took shape in a miniature satire called “In a Lecture-Room,” which he persuaded Tom to print in the Nassau Lit. “Good morning, Fool.	The overly academic personality.

our thirsty souls	“Good morning, Fool. Three times a week You hold us helpless while you speak, Teasing our thirsty souls with the Sleek ‘yeas’ of your philosophy. Well, here we are, your hundred sheep, Tune up, play on, pour forth.	Our souls that are thirsty.

speak, Teasing our thirsty souls with the Sleek ‘yeas’ of your philosophy.	“Good morning, Fool. Three times a week You hold us helpless while you speak, Teasing our thirsty souls with the Sleek ‘yeas’ of your philosophy. Well, here we are, your hundred sheep, Tune up, play on, pour forth.	speak, teasing our eager minds with the smooth "yeses" of your ideas.

the Sleek ‘yeas	“Good morning, Fool. Three times a week You hold us helpless while you speak, Teasing our thirsty souls with the Sleek ‘yeas’ of your philosophy. Well, here we are, your hundred sheep, Tune up, play on, pour forth.	The smooth "yeses"

an era’s must	we sleep. You are a student, so they say; You hammered out the other day A syllabus, from what we know Of some forgotten folio; You’d sniffled through an era’s must, Filling your nostrils up with dust, And then, arising from your knees, Published, in one gigantic sneeze. But here’s a neighbor on my right, An Eager Ass, considered bright; Asker of questions.	the smell of old things

arising from your knees, Published, in one gigantic sneeze.	we sleep. You are a student, so they say; You hammered out the other day A syllabus, from what we know Of some forgotten folio; You’d sniffled through an era’s must, Filling your nostrils up with dust, And then, arising from your knees, Published, in one gigantic sneeze. But here’s a neighbor on my right, An Eager Ass, considered bright; Asker of questions.	After getting up from your knees, you published it in a huge sneeze.

some forgotten folio	we sleep. You are a student, so they say; You hammered out the other day A syllabus, from what we know Of some forgotten folio; You’d sniffled through an era’s must, Filling your nostrils up with dust, And then, arising from your knees, Published, in one gigantic sneeze. But here’s a neighbor on my right, An Eager Ass, considered bright; Asker of questions.	a forgotten old book

one gigantic sneeze	we sleep. You are a student, so they say; You hammered out the other day A syllabus, from what we know Of some forgotten folio; You’d sniffled through an era’s must, Filling your nostrils up with dust, And then, arising from your knees, Published, in one gigantic sneeze. But here’s a neighbor on my right, An Eager Ass, considered bright; Asker of questions.	a really big sneeze

An Eager Ass	You are a student, so they say; You hammered out the other day A syllabus, from what we know Of some forgotten folio; You’d sniffled through an era’s must, Filling your nostrils up with dust, And then, arising from your knees, Published, in one gigantic sneeze. But here’s a neighbor on my right, An Eager Ass, considered bright; Asker of questions. How he’ll stand, With earnest air and fidgy hand, After this hour, telling you He sat all night and burrowed through Your book.	A very enthusiastic person

Asker of questions.	You are a student, so they say; You hammered out the other day A syllabus, from what we know Of some forgotten folio; You’d sniffled through an era’s must, Filling your nostrils up with dust, And then, arising from your knees, Published, in one gigantic sneeze. But here’s a neighbor on my right, An Eager Ass, considered bright; Asker of questions. How he’ll stand, With earnest air and fidgy hand, After this hour, telling you He sat all night and burrowed through Your book.	He asks questions.

stand, With earnest air and fidgy hand, After this hour, telling you He sat all night and burrowed through Your book.	But here’s a neighbor on my right, An Eager Ass, considered bright; Asker of questions. How he’ll stand, With earnest air and fidgy hand, After this hour, telling you He sat all night and burrowed through Your book. Oh, you’ll be coy and he Will simulate precosity, And pedants both, you’ll smile and smirk, And leer, and hasten back to work. ’	He'll stand there, looking serious and fidgeting, after this hour, telling you he stayed up all night reading your book.

earnest air and fidgy hand	But here’s a neighbor on my right, An Eager Ass, considered bright; Asker of questions. How he’ll stand, With earnest air and fidgy hand, After this hour, telling you He sat all night and burrowed through Your book. Oh, you’ll be coy and he Will simulate precosity, And pedants both, you’ll smile and smirk, And leer, and hasten back to work. ’	serious look and fidgety hand

smile and smirk, And leer, and hasten back to work. ’	How he’ll stand, With earnest air and fidgy hand, After this hour, telling you He sat all night and burrowed through Your book. Oh, you’ll be coy and he Will simulate precosity, And pedants both, you’ll smile and smirk, And leer, and hasten back to work. ’ Twas this day week, sir, you returned A theme of mine, from which I learned (Through various comment on the side Which you had scrawled) that I defied The highest rules of criticism For cheap and careless witticism.	Smile and smirk, and leer, and quickly return to work.

learned (Through various comment on the side Which you had scrawled) that I defied The highest rules of criticism For cheap and careless witticism.	Oh, you’ll be coy and he Will simulate precosity, And pedants both, you’ll smile and smirk, And leer, and hasten back to work. ’ Twas this day week, sir, you returned A theme of mine, from which I learned (Through various comment on the side Which you had scrawled) that I defied The highest rules of criticism For cheap and careless witticism. ‘Are you quite sure that this could be?’	I learned (from your comments written in the margins) that I was breaking the most important rules of criticism for the sake of being clever and not caring about quality.

cheap and careless witticism	Oh, you’ll be coy and he Will simulate precosity, And pedants both, you’ll smile and smirk, And leer, and hasten back to work. ’ Twas this day week, sir, you returned A theme of mine, from which I learned (Through various comment on the side Which you had scrawled) that I defied The highest rules of criticism For cheap and careless witticism. ‘Are you quite sure that this could be?’	A cheap and careless joke

Plays havoc with your best percent.	And ‘Shaw is no authority!’ But Eager Ass, with what he’s sent, Plays havoc with your best percent. Still—still I meet you here and there.	It ruins your best results.

hold a chair, And some defunct, moth-eaten star Enchants the mental prig you are.	Still—still I meet you here and there. When Shakespeare’s played you hold a chair, And some defunct, moth-eaten star Enchants the mental prig you are. A radical comes down and shocks The atheistic orthodox?– You’re representing Common Sense, Mouth open, in the audience.	You hold a chair, and some old, forgotten celebrity fascinates the snob you are.

the mental prig	Still—still I meet you here and there. When Shakespeare’s played you hold a chair, And some defunct, moth-eaten star Enchants the mental prig you are. A radical comes down and shocks The atheistic orthodox?– You’re representing Common Sense, Mouth open, in the audience.	your mind-set of a self-important person

some defunct, moth-eaten star	Still—still I meet you here and there. When Shakespeare’s played you hold a chair, And some defunct, moth-eaten star Enchants the mental prig you are. A radical comes down and shocks The atheistic orthodox?– You’re representing Common Sense, Mouth open, in the audience.	Some old, forgotten actor

The atheistic orthodox	When Shakespeare’s played you hold a chair, And some defunct, moth-eaten star Enchants the mental prig you are. A radical comes down and shocks The atheistic orthodox?– You’re representing Common Sense, Mouth open, in the audience. And, sometimes, even chapel lures That conscious tolerance of yours, That broad and beaming view of truth (Including Kant and General Booth.)	The non-religious traditionalists

tolerance of yours, That broad and beaming view of truth (Including Kant and General Booth.)	A radical comes down and shocks The atheistic orthodox?– You’re representing Common Sense, Mouth open, in the audience. And, sometimes, even chapel lures That conscious tolerance of yours, That broad and beaming view of truth (Including Kant and General Booth.) And so from shock to shock you live, A hollow, pale affirmative.	Your open-mindedness, your wide and optimistic view of truth (including thinkers like Kant and people like General Booth).

That broad and beaming view	A radical comes down and shocks The atheistic orthodox?– You’re representing Common Sense, Mouth open, in the audience. And, sometimes, even chapel lures That conscious tolerance of yours, That broad and beaming view of truth (Including Kant and General Booth.) And so from shock to shock you live, A hollow, pale affirmative.	That open and accepting perspective

so from shock to shock you live, A hollow, pale affirmative.	And, sometimes, even chapel lures That conscious tolerance of yours, That broad and beaming view of truth (Including Kant and General Booth.) And so from shock to shock you live, A hollow, pale affirmative. The hour’s up.	So you go from one upsetting thing to another, and you just say "yes" in a way that's empty and lifeless.

the noisy aisle-ways	The hour’s up. and roused from rest One hundred children of the blest Cheat you a word or two with feet That down the noisy aisle-ways beat. Forget on narrow-minded earth	the noisy hallways

children of the blest Cheat you a word or two with feet That down the noisy aisle-ways beat.	The hour’s up. and roused from rest One hundred children of the blest Cheat you a word or two with feet That down the noisy aisle-ways beat. Forget on narrow-minded earth	The blessed children trick you with a word or two and their feet as they run down the noisy aisles.

Forget on narrow-minded earth	and roused from rest One hundred children of the blest Cheat you a word or two with feet That down the noisy aisle-ways beat. Forget on narrow-minded earth The Mighty Yawn that gave you birth.”	Forget on this small-minded world.

narrow-minded earth	and roused from rest One hundred children of the blest Cheat you a word or two with feet That down the noisy aisle-ways beat. Forget on narrow-minded earth The Mighty Yawn that gave you birth.”	Close-minded world

The Mighty Yawn	Forget on narrow-minded earth The Mighty Yawn that gave you birth.” In April, Kerry Holiday left college and sailed for France to enroll in the Lafayette Esquadrille.	The beginning

Yawn that gave you birth.”	Forget on narrow-minded earth The Mighty Yawn that gave you birth.” In April, Kerry Holiday left college and sailed for France to enroll in the Lafayette Esquadrille.	The beginning you came from.

sailed for France to enroll in the Lafayette Esquadrille.	The Mighty Yawn that gave you birth.” In April, Kerry Holiday left college and sailed for France to enroll in the Lafayette Esquadrille. Amory’s envy and admiration of this step was drowned in an experience of his own to which he never succeeded in giving an appropriate value, but which, nevertheless, haunted him for three years afterward.	sailed to France to join the Lafayette Escadrille.

the Lafayette Esquadrille	The Mighty Yawn that gave you birth.” In April, Kerry Holiday left college and sailed for France to enroll in the Lafayette Esquadrille. Amory’s envy and admiration of this step was drowned in an experience of his own to which he never succeeded in giving an appropriate value, but which, nevertheless, haunted him for three years afterward.	the Lafayette Escadrille

experience of his own to which he never succeeded in giving an appropriate value, but which, nevertheless, haunted him for three years afterward.	In April, Kerry Holiday left college and sailed for France to enroll in the Lafayette Esquadrille. Amory’s envy and admiration of this step was drowned in an experience of his own to which he never succeeded in giving an appropriate value, but which, nevertheless, haunted him for three years afterward.	His own experience, which he couldn't properly appreciate, but which still bothered him for three years.

Amory’s envy	In April, Kerry Holiday left college and sailed for France to enroll in the Lafayette Esquadrille. Amory’s envy and admiration of this step was drowned in an experience of his own to which he never succeeded in giving an appropriate value, but which, nevertheless, haunted him for three years afterward.	Amory was envious.

taxied to Bistolary’s.	Healy’s they left at twelve and taxied to Bistolary’s. There were Axia Marlowe and Phoebe Column, from the Summer Garden show, Fred Sloane and Amory.	They took a taxi to Bistolary's.

were Axia Marlowe and Phoebe Column, from the Summer Garden show, Fred Sloane and Amory.	Healy’s they left at twelve and taxied to Bistolary’s. There were Axia Marlowe and Phoebe Column, from the Summer Garden show, Fred Sloane and Amory. The evening was so very young that they felt ridiculous with surplus energy, and burst into the café like Dionysian revellers.	Axia Marlowe and Phoebe Column, from the Summer Garden show, Fred Sloane, and Amory were there.

ridiculous with surplus energy, and burst into the café like Dionysian revellers.	There were Axia Marlowe and Phoebe Column, from the Summer Garden show, Fred Sloane and Amory. The evening was so very young that they felt ridiculous with surplus energy, and burst into the café like Dionysian revellers. “Table for four in the middle of the floor,” yelled Phoebe.	Feeling incredibly energetic, they burst into the café like wild partygoers.

Dionysian revellers	There were Axia Marlowe and Phoebe Column, from the Summer Garden show, Fred Sloane and Amory. The evening was so very young that they felt ridiculous with surplus energy, and burst into the café like Dionysian revellers. “Table for four in the middle of the floor,” yelled Phoebe.	People acting wild and excited

four in the middle of the floor,” yelled Phoebe.	The evening was so very young that they felt ridiculous with surplus energy, and burst into the café like Dionysian revellers. “Table for four in the middle of the floor,” yelled Phoebe. “Hurry, old dear, tell ’em we’re here!”	A table for four in the middle of the floor!" yelled Phoebe.

tell ’em we’re here!”	“Table for four in the middle of the floor,” yelled Phoebe. “Hurry, old dear, tell ’em we’re here!” “Tell ’em to play ‘Admiration’!”	Tell them we've arrived!

the muddled crowd	shouted Sloane. “You two order; Phoebe and I are going to shake a wicked calf,” and they sailed off in the muddled crowd. Axia and Amory, acquaintances of an hour, jostled behind a waiter to a table at a point of vantage; there they took seats and watched.	the confused crowd

sailed off in the muddled crowd.	shouted Sloane. “You two order; Phoebe and I are going to shake a wicked calf,” and they sailed off in the muddled crowd. Axia and Amory, acquaintances of an hour, jostled behind a waiter to a table at a point of vantage; there they took seats and watched.	left in the confused crowd.

a wicked calf	shouted Sloane. “You two order; Phoebe and I are going to shake a wicked calf,” and they sailed off in the muddled crowd. Axia and Amory, acquaintances of an hour, jostled behind a waiter to a table at a point of vantage; there they took seats and watched.	a great cocktail

acquaintances of an hour, jostled behind a waiter to a table at a point of vantage; there they took seats and watched.	“You two order; Phoebe and I are going to shake a wicked calf,” and they sailed off in the muddled crowd. Axia and Amory, acquaintances of an hour, jostled behind a waiter to a table at a point of vantage; there they took seats and watched. “There’s Findle Margotson, from New Haven!”	They, who had just met, pushed behind a waiter to get to a good table; they sat down there and watched.

Margotson, from New Haven!”	Axia and Amory, acquaintances of an hour, jostled behind a waiter to a table at a point of vantage; there they took seats and watched. “There’s Findle Margotson, from New Haven!” she cried above the uproar.	Margotson, from New Haven!

cried above the uproar.	“There’s Findle Margotson, from New Haven!” she cried above the uproar. “ ’Lo, Findle!	cried over the noise.

“Oh, Axia	Whoo-ee!” “Oh, Axia!” he shouted in salutation.	“Oh, Axia!”

shouted in salutation.	“Oh, Axia!” he shouted in salutation. “C’mon over to our table.”	greeted.

C’mon over to our table.”	he shouted in salutation. “C’mon over to our table.” “No!”	Come over to our table.

, Findle	Amory whispered. “Can’t do it, Findle; I’m with somebody else! Call me up tomorrow about one o’clock!”	Okay, Findle.

one o’clock	“Can’t do it, Findle; I’m with somebody else! Call me up tomorrow about one o’clock!” Findle, a nondescript man-about-Bisty’s, answered incoherently and turned back to the brilliant blonde whom he was endeavoring to steer around the room.	One o'clock.

Call me up tomorrow about one o’clock!”	“Can’t do it, Findle; I’m with somebody else! Call me up tomorrow about one o’clock!” Findle, a nondescript man-about-Bisty’s, answered incoherently and turned back to the brilliant blonde whom he was endeavoring to steer around the room.	Call me tomorrow around one o'clock!

a nondescript man	Call me up tomorrow about one o’clock!” Findle, a nondescript man-about-Bisty’s, answered incoherently and turned back to the brilliant blonde whom he was endeavoring to steer around the room. “There’s a natural damn fool,” commented Amory.	An ordinary man

back to the brilliant blonde whom he was endeavoring to steer around the room.	Call me up tomorrow about one o’clock!” Findle, a nondescript man-about-Bisty’s, answered incoherently and turned back to the brilliant blonde whom he was endeavoring to steer around the room. “There’s a natural damn fool,” commented Amory.	back to the gorgeous blonde he was trying to guide through the room.

the old jitney waiter	“Oh, he’s all right. Here’s the old jitney waiter. If you ask me, I want a double Daiquiri.”	the old waiter

ask me, I want a double Daiquiri.”	Here’s the old jitney waiter. If you ask me, I want a double Daiquiri.” “Make it four.”	I want a double Daiquiri.

a double Daiquiri	Here’s the old jitney waiter. If you ask me, I want a double Daiquiri.” “Make it four.”	A double Daiquiri.

refuse of Broadway, and women of two types, the higher of which was the chorus girl.	The crowd whirled and changed and shifted. They were mostly from the colleges, with a scattering of the male refuse of Broadway, and women of two types, the higher of which was the chorus girl. On the whole it was a typical crowd, and their party as typical as any.	Broadway's undesirable men, and women of two kinds, the more respectable being chorus girls.

fourths of the whole business was for effect and therefore harmless, ended at the door of the café, soon enough for the five-o’clock train back to Yale or Princeton; about one-fourth continued on into the dimmer hours and gathered strange dust from strange places.	On the whole it was a typical crowd, and their party as typical as any. About three-fourths of the whole business was for effect and therefore harmless, ended at the door of the café, soon enough for the five-o’clock train back to Yale or Princeton; about one-fourth continued on into the dimmer hours and gathered strange dust from strange places. Their party was scheduled to be one of the harmless kind.	Three-fourths of it was for show and didn't matter, stopping at the cafe door before the train back to Yale or Princeton; about one-fourth kept going into the late hours and got into trouble.

the dimmer hours	On the whole it was a typical crowd, and their party as typical as any. About three-fourths of the whole business was for effect and therefore harmless, ended at the door of the café, soon enough for the five-o’clock train back to Yale or Princeton; about one-fourth continued on into the dimmer hours and gathered strange dust from strange places. Their party was scheduled to be one of the harmless kind.	the later hours

the five-o’clock train	On the whole it was a typical crowd, and their party as typical as any. About three-fourths of the whole business was for effect and therefore harmless, ended at the door of the café, soon enough for the five-o’clock train back to Yale or Princeton; about one-fourth continued on into the dimmer hours and gathered strange dust from strange places. Their party was scheduled to be one of the harmless kind.	the five o'clock train

one of the harmless kind.	About three-fourths of the whole business was for effect and therefore harmless, ended at the door of the café, soon enough for the five-o’clock train back to Yale or Princeton; about one-fourth continued on into the dimmer hours and gathered strange dust from strange places. Their party was scheduled to be one of the harmless kind. Fred Sloane and Phoebe Column were old friends; Axia and Amory new ones.	one of the harmless kinds.

the harmless kind	About three-fourths of the whole business was for effect and therefore harmless, ended at the door of the café, soon enough for the five-o’clock train back to Yale or Princeton; about one-fourth continued on into the dimmer hours and gathered strange dust from strange places. Their party was scheduled to be one of the harmless kind. Fred Sloane and Phoebe Column were old friends; Axia and Amory new ones.	the harmless kind

Amory new ones	Their party was scheduled to be one of the harmless kind. Fred Sloane and Phoebe Column were old friends; Axia and Amory new ones. But strange things are prepared even in the dead of night, and the unusual, which lurks least in the café, home of the prosaic and inevitable, was preparing to spoil for him the waning romance of Broadway.	Amory, who they just met.

Sloane and Phoebe Column were old friends; Axia and Amory new ones.	Their party was scheduled to be one of the harmless kind. Fred Sloane and Phoebe Column were old friends; Axia and Amory new ones. But strange things are prepared even in the dead of night, and the unusual, which lurks least in the café, home of the prosaic and inevitable, was preparing to spoil for him the waning romance of Broadway.	Fred Sloane and Phoebe Column were old friends, and Axia and Amory were new friends.

home of the prosaic and inevitable, was preparing to spoil for him the waning romance of Broadway.	Fred Sloane and Phoebe Column were old friends; Axia and Amory new ones. But strange things are prepared even in the dead of night, and the unusual, which lurks least in the café, home of the prosaic and inevitable, was preparing to spoil for him the waning romance of Broadway. The way it took was so inexpressibly terrible, so unbelievable, that afterward he never thought of it as experience; but it was a scene from a misty tragedy, played far behind the veil, and that it meant something definite he knew.	The café, a place of ordinary and predictable things, was about to ruin his fading love for Broadway.

the waning romance	Fred Sloane and Phoebe Column were old friends; Axia and Amory new ones. But strange things are prepared even in the dead of night, and the unusual, which lurks least in the café, home of the prosaic and inevitable, was preparing to spoil for him the waning romance of Broadway. The way it took was so inexpressibly terrible, so unbelievable, that afterward he never thought of it as experience; but it was a scene from a misty tragedy, played far behind the veil, and that it meant something definite he knew.	the fading romance

a misty tragedy	But strange things are prepared even in the dead of night, and the unusual, which lurks least in the café, home of the prosaic and inevitable, was preparing to spoil for him the waning romance of Broadway. The way it took was so inexpressibly terrible, so unbelievable, that afterward he never thought of it as experience; but it was a scene from a misty tragedy, played far behind the veil, and that it meant something definite he knew. About one o’clock they moved to Maxim’s, and two found them in Devinière’s.	A blurry, unclear tragedy.

played far behind the veil, and that it meant something definite he knew.	But strange things are prepared even in the dead of night, and the unusual, which lurks least in the café, home of the prosaic and inevitable, was preparing to spoil for him the waning romance of Broadway. The way it took was so inexpressibly terrible, so unbelievable, that afterward he never thought of it as experience; but it was a scene from a misty tragedy, played far behind the veil, and that it meant something definite he knew. About one o’clock they moved to Maxim’s, and two found them in Devinière’s.	It happened secretly, and he knew it had a specific meaning.

moved to Maxim’s, and two found them in Devinière’s.	The way it took was so inexpressibly terrible, so unbelievable, that afterward he never thought of it as experience; but it was a scene from a misty tragedy, played far behind the veil, and that it meant something definite he knew. About one o’clock they moved to Maxim’s, and two found them in Devinière’s. Sloane had been drinking consecutively and was in a state of unsteady exhilaration, but Amory was quite tiresomely sober; they had run across none of those ancient, corrupt buyers of champagne who usually assisted their New York parties.	They went to Maxim's, and at two o'clock they were at Devinière's.

those ancient, corrupt buyers	About one o’clock they moved to Maxim’s, and two found them in Devinière’s. Sloane had been drinking consecutively and was in a state of unsteady exhilaration, but Amory was quite tiresomely sober; they had run across none of those ancient, corrupt buyers of champagne who usually assisted their New York parties. They were just through dancing and were making their way back to their chairs when Amory became aware that someone at a nearby table was looking at him.	The old, dishonest people who bought things

unsteady exhilaration	About one o’clock they moved to Maxim’s, and two found them in Devinière’s. Sloane had been drinking consecutively and was in a state of unsteady exhilaration, but Amory was quite tiresomely sober; they had run across none of those ancient, corrupt buyers of champagne who usually assisted their New York parties. They were just through dancing and were making their way back to their chairs when Amory became aware that someone at a nearby table was looking at him.	A shaky excitement

buyers of champagne who usually assisted their New York parties.	About one o’clock they moved to Maxim’s, and two found them in Devinière’s. Sloane had been drinking consecutively and was in a state of unsteady exhilaration, but Amory was quite tiresomely sober; they had run across none of those ancient, corrupt buyers of champagne who usually assisted their New York parties. They were just through dancing and were making their way back to their chairs when Amory became aware that someone at a nearby table was looking at him.	people who usually helped with their parties in New York.

someone at a nearby table was looking at him.	Sloane had been drinking consecutively and was in a state of unsteady exhilaration, but Amory was quite tiresomely sober; they had run across none of those ancient, corrupt buyers of champagne who usually assisted their New York parties. They were just through dancing and were making their way back to their chairs when Amory became aware that someone at a nearby table was looking at him. He turned and glanced casually.	Someone at a nearby table was looking at him.

sitting a little apart at a table by himself and watching their party intently.	He turned and glanced casually. a middle-aged man dressed in a brown sack suit, it was, sitting a little apart at a table by himself and watching their party intently. At Amory’s glance he smiled faintly.	He was sitting alone at a table a little away from them, watching their group closely.

a brown sack suit	He turned and glanced casually. a middle-aged man dressed in a brown sack suit, it was, sitting a little apart at a table by himself and watching their party intently. At Amory’s glance he smiled faintly.	A brown suit.

smiled faintly.	a middle-aged man dressed in a brown sack suit, it was, sitting a little apart at a table by himself and watching their party intently. At Amory’s glance he smiled faintly. Amory turned to Fred, who was just sitting down.	He smiled a little.

Amory’s glance	a middle-aged man dressed in a brown sack suit, it was, sitting a little apart at a table by himself and watching their party intently. At Amory’s glance he smiled faintly. Amory turned to Fred, who was just sitting down.	When Amory looked at him

rose to his feet and swayed back and forth, clinging to his chair.	“We’ll have him thrown out!” He rose to his feet and swayed back and forth, clinging to his chair. “Where is he?”	He stood up and rocked back and forth, holding onto his chair.

found themselves on their way to the door.	“Where is he?” Axia and Phoebe suddenly leaned and whispered to each other across the table, and before Amory realized it they found themselves on their way to the door. “Where now?” “Up to the flat,” suggested Phoebe.	they started heading to the door.

suggested Phoebe.	Axia and Phoebe suddenly leaned and whispered to each other across the table, and before Amory realized it they found themselves on their way to the door. “Where now?” “Up to the flat,” suggested Phoebe. “We’ve got brandy and fizz—and everything’s slow down here tonight.”	Phoebe suggested it.

be reasonably discreet for him to trot along in the party.	Amory considered quickly. He hadn’t been drinking, and decided that if he took no more, it would be reasonably discreet for him to trot along in the party. In fact, it would be, perhaps, the thing to do in order to keep an eye on Sloane, who was not in a state to do his own thinking.	It would be reasonably discreet for him to go with the party.

was not in a state to do his own thinking.	He hadn’t been drinking, and decided that if he took no more, it would be reasonably discreet for him to trot along in the party. In fact, it would be, perhaps, the thing to do in order to keep an eye on Sloane, who was not in a state to do his own thinking. So he took Axia’s arm and, piling intimately into a taxicab, they drove out over the hundreds and drew up at a tall, white-stone apartment-house.	couldn't think for himself.

piling intimately into a taxicab, they drove out over the hundreds and drew up at a tall, white-stone apartment-house.	In fact, it would be, perhaps, the thing to do in order to keep an eye on Sloane, who was not in a state to do his own thinking. So he took Axia’s arm and, piling intimately into a taxicab, they drove out over the hundreds and drew up at a tall, white-stone apartment-house. Never would he forget that street.	They got into a taxi closely together and drove through the city to a tall, white stone apartment building.

Axia’s arm	In fact, it would be, perhaps, the thing to do in order to keep an eye on Sloane, who was not in a state to do his own thinking. So he took Axia’s arm and, piling intimately into a taxicab, they drove out over the hundreds and drew up at a tall, white-stone apartment-house. Never would he forget that street.	Axia's arm

a bright moonlight	Never would he forget that street. It was a broad street, lined on both sides with just such tall, white-stone buildings, dotted with dark windows; they stretched along as far as the eye could see, flooded with a bright moonlight that gave them a calcium pallor. He imagined each one to have an elevator and a colored hall-boy and a key-rack; each one to be eight stories high and full of three and four room suites.	bright moonlight

lined on both sides with just such tall, white-stone buildings, dotted with dark windows; they stretched along as far as the eye could see, flooded with a bright moonlight that gave them a calcium pallor.	Never would he forget that street. It was a broad street, lined on both sides with just such tall, white-stone buildings, dotted with dark windows; they stretched along as far as the eye could see, flooded with a bright moonlight that gave them a calcium pallor. He imagined each one to have an elevator and a colored hall-boy and a key-rack; each one to be eight stories high and full of three and four room suites.	On both sides were tall, white-stone buildings with dark windows; they went on as far as you could see, and were lit by bright moonlight that made them look pale.

a calcium pallor	Never would he forget that street. It was a broad street, lined on both sides with just such tall, white-stone buildings, dotted with dark windows; they stretched along as far as the eye could see, flooded with a bright moonlight that gave them a calcium pallor. He imagined each one to have an elevator and a colored hall-boy and a key-rack; each one to be eight stories high and full of three and four room suites.	a pale, white color

just such tall, white-stone buildings	Never would he forget that street. It was a broad street, lined on both sides with just such tall, white-stone buildings, dotted with dark windows; they stretched along as far as the eye could see, flooded with a bright moonlight that gave them a calcium pallor. He imagined each one to have an elevator and a colored hall-boy and a key-rack; each one to be eight stories high and full of three and four room suites.	tall, white-stone buildings like those

three and four room suites	It was a broad street, lined on both sides with just such tall, white-stone buildings, dotted with dark windows; they stretched along as far as the eye could see, flooded with a bright moonlight that gave them a calcium pallor. He imagined each one to have an elevator and a colored hall-boy and a key-rack; each one to be eight stories high and full of three and four room suites. He was rather glad to walk into the cheeriness of Phoebe’s living-room and sink onto a sofa, while the girls went rummaging for food.	apartments with three or four rooms

full of three and four room suites.	It was a broad street, lined on both sides with just such tall, white-stone buildings, dotted with dark windows; they stretched along as far as the eye could see, flooded with a bright moonlight that gave them a calcium pallor. He imagined each one to have an elevator and a colored hall-boy and a key-rack; each one to be eight stories high and full of three and four room suites. He was rather glad to walk into the cheeriness of Phoebe’s living-room and sink onto a sofa, while the girls went rummaging for food.	full of apartments with three or four rooms.

rummaging for food.	He imagined each one to have an elevator and a colored hall-boy and a key-rack; each one to be eight stories high and full of three and four room suites. He was rather glad to walk into the cheeriness of Phoebe’s living-room and sink onto a sofa, while the girls went rummaging for food. “Phoebe’s great stuff,” confided Sloane, sotto voce.	looking for food.

Phoebe’s living-room	He imagined each one to have an elevator and a colored hall-boy and a key-rack; each one to be eight stories high and full of three and four room suites. He was rather glad to walk into the cheeriness of Phoebe’s living-room and sink onto a sofa, while the girls went rummaging for food. “Phoebe’s great stuff,” confided Sloane, sotto voce.	Phoebe's living room

—don’t le’s rush	“Hell y’ say,” protested Sloane. “We’re here now—don’t le’s rush.” “I don’t like this place,” Amory said sulkily, “and I don’t want any food.”	—let's not rush

brandy bottle	“I don’t like this place,” Amory said sulkily, “and I don’t want any food.” Phoebe reappeared with sandwiches, brandy bottle, siphon, and four glasses. “Amory, pour ’em out,” she said, “and we’ll drink to Fred Sloane, who has a rare, distinguished edge.”	Brandy bottle

reappeared with sandwiches, brandy bottle, siphon, and four glasses.	“I don’t like this place,” Amory said sulkily, “and I don’t want any food.” Phoebe reappeared with sandwiches, brandy bottle, siphon, and four glasses. “Amory, pour ’em out,” she said, “and we’ll drink to Fred Sloane, who has a rare, distinguished edge.”	She came back with sandwiches, a brandy bottle, a siphon, and four glasses.

Sloane, who has a rare, distinguished edge.”	Phoebe reappeared with sandwiches, brandy bottle, siphon, and four glasses. “Amory, pour ’em out,” she said, “and we’ll drink to Fred Sloane, who has a rare, distinguished edge.” “Yes,” said Axia, coming in, “and Amory.	Sloane, who is exceptionally sharp and sophisticated.

said Axia, coming in, “and Amory.	“Amory, pour ’em out,” she said, “and we’ll drink to Fred Sloane, who has a rare, distinguished edge.” “Yes,” said Axia, coming in, “and Amory. I like Amory.”	Axia said, coming in, "And Amory.

was a minute while temptation crept over him like a warm wind, and his imagination turned to fire, and he took the glass from Phoebe’s hand.	Amory hesitated, glass in hand. There was a minute while temptation crept over him like a warm wind, and his imagination turned to fire, and he took the glass from Phoebe’s hand. That was all; for at the second that his decision came, he looked up and saw, ten yards from him, the man who had been in the café, and with his jump of astonishment the glass fell from his uplifted hand.	For a moment, temptation slowly overcame him, and he imagined exciting things. He then took the glass from Phoebe.

Phoebe’s hand	Amory hesitated, glass in hand. There was a minute while temptation crept over him like a warm wind, and his imagination turned to fire, and he took the glass from Phoebe’s hand. That was all; for at the second that his decision came, he looked up and saw, ten yards from him, the man who had been in the café, and with his jump of astonishment the glass fell from his uplifted hand.	Phoebe's hand

his uplifted hand	There was a minute while temptation crept over him like a warm wind, and his imagination turned to fire, and he took the glass from Phoebe’s hand. That was all; for at the second that his decision came, he looked up and saw, ten yards from him, the man who had been in the café, and with his jump of astonishment the glass fell from his uplifted hand. There the man half sat, half leaned against a pile of pillows on the corner divan.	his raised hand

second that his decision came, he looked up and saw, ten yards from him, the man who had been in the café, and with his jump of astonishment the glass fell from his uplifted hand.	There was a minute while temptation crept over him like a warm wind, and his imagination turned to fire, and he took the glass from Phoebe’s hand. That was all; for at the second that his decision came, he looked up and saw, ten yards from him, the man who had been in the café, and with his jump of astonishment the glass fell from his uplifted hand. There the man half sat, half leaned against a pile of pillows on the corner divan.	The instant he made his decision, he looked up and saw the man from the café about ten yards away. He jumped in surprise, and the glass fell from his raised hand.

pile of pillows on the corner divan.	That was all; for at the second that his decision came, he looked up and saw, ten yards from him, the man who had been in the café, and with his jump of astonishment the glass fell from his uplifted hand. There the man half sat, half leaned against a pile of pillows on the corner divan. His face was cast in the same yellow wax as in the café, neither the dull, pasty color of a dead man—rather a sort of virile pallor—nor unhealthy, you’d have called it; but like a strong man who’d worked in a mine or done night shifts in a damp climate.	stack of pillows on the corner couch

the corner divan	That was all; for at the second that his decision came, he looked up and saw, ten yards from him, the man who had been in the café, and with his jump of astonishment the glass fell from his uplifted hand. There the man half sat, half leaned against a pile of pillows on the corner divan. His face was cast in the same yellow wax as in the café, neither the dull, pasty color of a dead man—rather a sort of virile pallor—nor unhealthy, you’d have called it; but like a strong man who’d worked in a mine or done night shifts in a damp climate.	the couch in the corner

neither the dull, pasty color	There the man half sat, half leaned against a pile of pillows on the corner divan. His face was cast in the same yellow wax as in the café, neither the dull, pasty color of a dead man—rather a sort of virile pallor—nor unhealthy, you’d have called it; but like a strong man who’d worked in a mine or done night shifts in a damp climate. Amory looked him over carefully and later he could have drawn him after a fashion, down to the merest details.	It wasn't a dull, pale color.

a damp climate	There the man half sat, half leaned against a pile of pillows on the corner divan. His face was cast in the same yellow wax as in the café, neither the dull, pasty color of a dead man—rather a sort of virile pallor—nor unhealthy, you’d have called it; but like a strong man who’d worked in a mine or done night shifts in a damp climate. Amory looked him over carefully and later he could have drawn him after a fashion, down to the merest details.	a humid climate

done night shifts in a damp climate.	There the man half sat, half leaned against a pile of pillows on the corner divan. His face was cast in the same yellow wax as in the café, neither the dull, pasty color of a dead man—rather a sort of virile pallor—nor unhealthy, you’d have called it; but like a strong man who’d worked in a mine or done night shifts in a damp climate. Amory looked him over carefully and later he could have drawn him after a fashion, down to the merest details.	worked nights in a humid climate.

virile pallor	There the man half sat, half leaned against a pile of pillows on the corner divan. His face was cast in the same yellow wax as in the café, neither the dull, pasty color of a dead man—rather a sort of virile pallor—nor unhealthy, you’d have called it; but like a strong man who’d worked in a mine or done night shifts in a damp climate. Amory looked him over carefully and later he could have drawn him after a fashion, down to the merest details.	healthy paleness

drawn him after a fashion, down to the merest details.	His face was cast in the same yellow wax as in the café, neither the dull, pasty color of a dead man—rather a sort of virile pallor—nor unhealthy, you’d have called it; but like a strong man who’d worked in a mine or done night shifts in a damp climate. Amory looked him over carefully and later he could have drawn him after a fashion, down to the merest details. His mouth was the kind that is called frank, and he had steady gray eyes that moved slowly from one to the other of their group, with just the shade of a questioning expression.	drawn him in a way that captured even the smallest details.

eyes that moved slowly from one to the other of their group, with just the shade of a questioning expression.	Amory looked him over carefully and later he could have drawn him after a fashion, down to the merest details. His mouth was the kind that is called frank, and he had steady gray eyes that moved slowly from one to the other of their group, with just the shade of a questioning expression. Amory noticed his hands; they weren’t fine at all, but they had versatility and a tenuous strength.	eyes that slowly looked at each person in their group, with a slightly questioning look.

a tenuous strength	His mouth was the kind that is called frank, and he had steady gray eyes that moved slowly from one to the other of their group, with just the shade of a questioning expression. Amory noticed his hands; they weren’t fine at all, but they had versatility and a tenuous strength. they were nervous hands that sat lightly along the cushions and moved constantly with little jerky openings and closings.	a fragile strength

little jerky openings	Amory noticed his hands; they weren’t fine at all, but they had versatility and a tenuous strength. they were nervous hands that sat lightly along the cushions and moved constantly with little jerky openings and closings. Then, suddenly, Amory perceived the feet, and with a rush of blood to the head he realized he was afraid.	small, quick movements

sat lightly along the cushions and moved constantly with little jerky openings and closings.	Amory noticed his hands; they weren’t fine at all, but they had versatility and a tenuous strength. they were nervous hands that sat lightly along the cushions and moved constantly with little jerky openings and closings. Then, suddenly, Amory perceived the feet, and with a rush of blood to the head he realized he was afraid.	sat gently on the cushions and were always moving with small, quick motions.

head he realized he was afraid.	they were nervous hands that sat lightly along the cushions and moved constantly with little jerky openings and closings. Then, suddenly, Amory perceived the feet, and with a rush of blood to the head he realized he was afraid. The feet were all wrong.	He realized with a rush of blood to his head that he was afraid.

sort of wrongness that he felt rather than knew.	The feet were all wrong. with a sort of wrongness that he felt rather than knew. It was like weakness in a good woman, or blood on satin; one of those terrible incongruities that shake little things in the back of the brain.	A kind of wrongness he sensed more than understood.

those terrible incongruities	with a sort of wrongness that he felt rather than knew. It was like weakness in a good woman, or blood on satin; one of those terrible incongruities that shake little things in the back of the brain. He wore no shoes, but, instead, a sort of half moccasin, pointed, though, like the shoes they wore in the fourteenth century, and with the little ends curling up.	Those awful inconsistencies

blood on satin; one of those terrible incongruities that shake little things in the back of the brain.	with a sort of wrongness that he felt rather than knew. It was like weakness in a good woman, or blood on satin; one of those terrible incongruities that shake little things in the back of the brain. He wore no shoes, but, instead, a sort of half moccasin, pointed, though, like the shoes they wore in the fourteenth century, and with the little ends curling up.	Blood on satin; it was one of those awful mismatches that made him feel uneasy.

pointed, though, like the shoes they wore in the fourteenth century, and with the little ends curling up.	It was like weakness in a good woman, or blood on satin; one of those terrible incongruities that shake little things in the back of the brain. He wore no shoes, but, instead, a sort of half moccasin, pointed, though, like the shoes they wore in the fourteenth century, and with the little ends curling up. They were a darkish brown and his toes seemed to fill them to the end.	They were pointed, like the shoes people wore in the 1300s, and the tips curled up.

the fourteenth century	It was like weakness in a good woman, or blood on satin; one of those terrible incongruities that shake little things in the back of the brain. He wore no shoes, but, instead, a sort of half moccasin, pointed, though, like the shoes they wore in the fourteenth century, and with the little ends curling up. They were a darkish brown and his toes seemed to fill them to the end.	the 1300s

half moccasin	It was like weakness in a good woman, or blood on satin; one of those terrible incongruities that shake little things in the back of the brain. He wore no shoes, but, instead, a sort of half moccasin, pointed, though, like the shoes they wore in the fourteenth century, and with the little ends curling up. They were a darkish brown and his toes seemed to fill them to the end.	A type of shoe

a darkish brown	He wore no shoes, but, instead, a sort of half moccasin, pointed, though, like the shoes they wore in the fourteenth century, and with the little ends curling up. They were a darkish brown and his toes seemed to fill them to the end. They were unutterably terrible.	a dark brown

fill them to the end.	He wore no shoes, but, instead, a sort of half moccasin, pointed, though, like the shoes they wore in the fourteenth century, and with the little ends curling up. They were a darkish brown and his toes seemed to fill them to the end. They were unutterably terrible.	Filled them completely.

a strange goodness	They were unutterably terrible. He must have said something, or looked something, for Axia’s voice came out of the void with a strange goodness. “Well, look at Amory!	a strange kindness

Axia’s voice	They were unutterably terrible. He must have said something, or looked something, for Axia’s voice came out of the void with a strange goodness. “Well, look at Amory!	Axia's voice

out of the void with a strange goodness.	They were unutterably terrible. He must have said something, or looked something, for Axia’s voice came out of the void with a strange goodness. “Well, look at Amory!	from the darkness with a strange kindness.

look at Amory!	He must have said something, or looked something, for Axia’s voice came out of the void with a strange goodness. “Well, look at Amory! Poor old Amory’s sick—old head going ’round?”	Look at Amory!

Poor old Amory’s sick—old head	“Well, look at Amory! Poor old Amory’s sick—old head going ’round?” “Look at that man!”	Poor old Amory's sick—feeling dizzy

pointing toward the corner divan.	“Look at that man!” cried Amory, pointing toward the corner divan. “You mean that purple zebra!” shrieked Axia facetiously.	pointing at the corner couch.

the corner divan	“Look at that man!” cried Amory, pointing toward the corner divan. “You mean that purple zebra!” shrieked Axia facetiously.	the couch in the corner

that purple zebra	cried Amory, pointing toward the corner divan. “You mean that purple zebra!” shrieked Axia facetiously. “Ooo-ee!	That purple zebra.

zebra watching him!”	“Ooo-ee! Amory’s got a purple zebra watching him!” Sloane laughed vacantly.	zebra is watching him!"

a purple zebra	“Ooo-ee! Amory’s got a purple zebra watching him!” Sloane laughed vacantly.	A purple zebra

“Ole zebra gotcha	Sloane laughed vacantly. “Ole zebra gotcha, Amory?” There was a silence.	"Did the old zebra get you?"

the whole divan	The man regarded Amory quizzically. Then the human voices fell faintly on his ear: “Thought you weren’t drinking,” remarked Axia sardonically, but her voice was good to hear; the whole divan that held the man was alive; alive like heat waves over asphalt, like wriggling worms. “Come back!	the whole couch

fell faintly on his ear: “Thought you weren’t drinking,” remarked Axia sardonically, but her voice was good to hear; the whole divan that held the man was alive; alive like heat waves over asphalt, like wriggling worms.	The man regarded Amory quizzically. Then the human voices fell faintly on his ear: “Thought you weren’t drinking,” remarked Axia sardonically, but her voice was good to hear; the whole divan that held the man was alive; alive like heat waves over asphalt, like wriggling worms. “Come back!	He heard the faint voices: "I thought you weren't drinking," Axia said sarcastically, but her voice was pleasant. The whole couch where the man sat felt alive; alive like heat shimmering over pavement, like squirming worms.

Axia’s arm	Come back!” Axia’s arm fell on his. “Amory, dear, you aren’t going, Amory!”	Axia's arm

Amory, dear, you aren’t going, Amory!”	Axia’s arm fell on his. “Amory, dear, you aren’t going, Amory!” He was halfway to the door.	Amory, dear, you aren't going, Amory!

halfway to the door.	“Amory, dear, you aren’t going, Amory!” He was halfway to the door. “Come on, Amory, stick ’th us!”	He was halfway to the door.

Amory, stick ’th us!”	He was halfway to the door. “Come on, Amory, stick ’th us!” “Sick, are you?”	Amory, stick with us!

a little brandy	“Take some water.” “Take a little brandy.” The elevator was close, and the colored boy was half asleep, paled to a livid bronze.	A little brandy.

paled to a livid bronze.	“Take a little brandy.” The elevator was close, and the colored boy was half asleep, paled to a livid bronze. Axia’s beseeching voice floated down the shaft.	Turned a pale, purplish-brown color.

a livid bronze	“Take a little brandy.” The elevator was close, and the colored boy was half asleep, paled to a livid bronze. Axia’s beseeching voice floated down the shaft.	A pale bronze color.

Axia’s beseeching voice	The elevator was close, and the colored boy was half asleep, paled to a livid bronze. Axia’s beseeching voice floated down the shaft. Those feet.	Axia's pleading voice

the paved hall	those feet. As they settled to the lower floor the feet came into view in the sickly electric light of the paved hall.	The hall with the paved floor.

the sickly electric light	those feet. As they settled to the lower floor the feet came into view in the sickly electric light of the paved hall.	The dim electric light

light of the paved hall.	those feet. As they settled to the lower floor the feet came into view in the sickly electric light of the paved hall.	light in the tiled hallway.

came the moon, and Amory turned his back on it and walked.	Down the long street came the moon, and Amory turned his back on it and walked. Ten, fifteen steps away sounded the footsteps.	The moon appeared, and Amory turned away and walked.

insistence in their fall.	Ten, fifteen steps away sounded the footsteps. They were like a slow dripping, with just the slightest insistence in their fall. Amory’s shadow lay, perhaps, ten feet ahead of him, and soft shoes was presumably that far behind.	They landed with a slight emphasis.

a slow dripping	Ten, fifteen steps away sounded the footsteps. They were like a slow dripping, with just the slightest insistence in their fall. Amory’s shadow lay, perhaps, ten feet ahead of him, and soft shoes was presumably that far behind.	slow dripping

just the slightest insistence	Ten, fifteen steps away sounded the footsteps. They were like a slow dripping, with just the slightest insistence in their fall. Amory’s shadow lay, perhaps, ten feet ahead of him, and soft shoes was presumably that far behind.	a tiny bit of force

ahead of him, and soft shoes was presumably that far behind.	They were like a slow dripping, with just the slightest insistence in their fall. Amory’s shadow lay, perhaps, ten feet ahead of him, and soft shoes was presumably that far behind. With the instinct of a child Amory edged in under the blue darkness of the white buildings, cleaving the moonlight for haggard seconds, once bursting into a slow run with clumsy stumblings.	ahead of him, and the sound of his soft shoes was probably that far behind.

Amory’s shadow	They were like a slow dripping, with just the slightest insistence in their fall. Amory’s shadow lay, perhaps, ten feet ahead of him, and soft shoes was presumably that far behind. With the instinct of a child Amory edged in under the blue darkness of the white buildings, cleaving the moonlight for haggard seconds, once bursting into a slow run with clumsy stumblings.	Amory's shadow

clumsy stumblings	Amory’s shadow lay, perhaps, ten feet ahead of him, and soft shoes was presumably that far behind. With the instinct of a child Amory edged in under the blue darkness of the white buildings, cleaving the moonlight for haggard seconds, once bursting into a slow run with clumsy stumblings. After that he stopped suddenly; he must keep hold, he thought.	tripping clumsily

haggard seconds	Amory’s shadow lay, perhaps, ten feet ahead of him, and soft shoes was presumably that far behind. With the instinct of a child Amory edged in under the blue darkness of the white buildings, cleaving the moonlight for haggard seconds, once bursting into a slow run with clumsy stumblings. After that he stopped suddenly; he must keep hold, he thought.	Tired seconds

bursting into a slow run with clumsy stumblings.	Amory’s shadow lay, perhaps, ten feet ahead of him, and soft shoes was presumably that far behind. With the instinct of a child Amory edged in under the blue darkness of the white buildings, cleaving the moonlight for haggard seconds, once bursting into a slow run with clumsy stumblings. After that he stopped suddenly; he must keep hold, he thought.	He started to run slowly, tripping clumsily.

people left in the world or did they all live in white apartment-houses now?	His lips were dry and he licked them. If he met anyone good—were there any good people left in the world or did they all live in white apartment-houses now? Was everyone followed in the moonlight?	Are there any good people left in the world, or do they all live in white apartment buildings now?

followed in the moonlight?	If he met anyone good—were there any good people left in the world or did they all live in white apartment-houses now? Was everyone followed in the moonlight? But if he met someone good who’d know what he meant and hear this damned scuffle.	Was everyone being secretly watched?

met someone good who’d know what he meant and hear this damned scuffle.	Was everyone followed in the moonlight? But if he met someone good who’d know what he meant and hear this damned scuffle. then the scuffling grew suddenly nearer, and a black cloud settled over the moon.	Met someone good who would understand him and hear this awful struggle.

this damned scuffle	Was everyone followed in the moonlight? But if he met someone good who’d know what he meant and hear this damned scuffle. then the scuffling grew suddenly nearer, and a black cloud settled over the moon.	This awful fight

the pale sheen	then the scuffling grew suddenly nearer, and a black cloud settled over the moon. When again the pale sheen skimmed the cornices, it was almost beside him, and Amory thought he heard a quiet breathing. Suddenly he realized that the footsteps were not behind, had never been behind, they were ahead and he was not eluding but following.	The pale light

was almost beside him, and Amory thought he heard a quiet breathing.	then the scuffling grew suddenly nearer, and a black cloud settled over the moon. When again the pale sheen skimmed the cornices, it was almost beside him, and Amory thought he heard a quiet breathing. Suddenly he realized that the footsteps were not behind, had never been behind, they were ahead and he was not eluding but following.	It was almost next to him, and Amory thought he heard someone breathing softly.

began to run, blindly, his heart knocking heavily, his hands clinched.	following. He began to run, blindly, his heart knocking heavily, his hands clinched. Far ahead a black dot showed itself, resolved slowly into a human shape.	He started running blindly, his heart pounding hard, his hands clenched.

old rottenness	Far ahead a black dot showed itself, resolved slowly into a human shape. But Amory was beyond that now; he turned off the street and darted into an alley, narrow and dark and smelling of old rottenness. He twisted down a long, sinuous blackness, where the moonlight was shut away except for tiny glints and patches.	Rotten smell

was beyond that now; he turned off the street and darted into an alley, narrow and dark and smelling of old rottenness.	Far ahead a black dot showed itself, resolved slowly into a human shape. But Amory was beyond that now; he turned off the street and darted into an alley, narrow and dark and smelling of old rottenness. He twisted down a long, sinuous blackness, where the moonlight was shut away except for tiny glints and patches.	He was past caring about that; he turned off the street and ran into an alley that was narrow, dark, and smelled of decay.

tiny glints	But Amory was beyond that now; he turned off the street and darted into an alley, narrow and dark and smelling of old rottenness. He twisted down a long, sinuous blackness, where the moonlight was shut away except for tiny glints and patches. then suddenly sank panting into a corner by a fence, exhausted.	small flashes

blackness, where the moonlight was shut away except for tiny glints and patches.	But Amory was beyond that now; he turned off the street and darted into an alley, narrow and dark and smelling of old rottenness. He twisted down a long, sinuous blackness, where the moonlight was shut away except for tiny glints and patches. then suddenly sank panting into a corner by a fence, exhausted.	Darkness where the moonlight was blocked out except for small sparkles and spots.

a long, sinuous blackness	But Amory was beyond that now; he turned off the street and darted into an alley, narrow and dark and smelling of old rottenness. He twisted down a long, sinuous blackness, where the moonlight was shut away except for tiny glints and patches. then suddenly sank panting into a corner by a fence, exhausted.	A long, winding darkness.

sank panting into a corner by a fence, exhausted.	He twisted down a long, sinuous blackness, where the moonlight was shut away except for tiny glints and patches. then suddenly sank panting into a corner by a fence, exhausted. The steps ahead stopped, and he could hear them shift slightly with a continuous motion, like waves around a dock.	He collapsed, gasping for breath, in a corner near a fence, completely worn out.

motion, like waves around a dock.	then suddenly sank panting into a corner by a fence, exhausted. The steps ahead stopped, and he could hear them shift slightly with a continuous motion, like waves around a dock. He put his face in his hands and covered eyes and ears as well as he could.	motion, like waves around a dock.

occurred to him that he was delirious or drunk.	He put his face in his hands and covered eyes and ears as well as he could. During all this time it never occurred to him that he was delirious or drunk. He had a sense of reality such as material things could never give him.	It didn't cross his mind that he was out of his mind or drunk.

reality such as material things could never give him.	During all this time it never occurred to him that he was delirious or drunk. He had a sense of reality such as material things could never give him. His intellectual content seemed to submit passively to it, and it fitted like a glove everything that had ever preceded it in his life.	a sense of reality that material things couldn't.

everything that had ever preceded it in his life.	He had a sense of reality such as material things could never give him. His intellectual content seemed to submit passively to it, and it fitted like a glove everything that had ever preceded it in his life. It did not muddle him.	everything that had happened before in his life.

was like a problem whose answer he knew on paper, yet whose solution he was unable to grasp.	It did not muddle him. It was like a problem whose answer he knew on paper, yet whose solution he was unable to grasp. He was far beyond horror.	It was like a problem he knew the answer to, but couldn't understand how to solve.

surface of that, now moved in a region where the feet and the fear of white walls were real, living things, things he must accept.	He was far beyond horror. He had sunk through the thin surface of that, now moved in a region where the feet and the fear of white walls were real, living things, things he must accept. Only far inside his soul a little fire leaped and cried that something was pulling him down, trying to get him inside a door and slam it behind him.	surface of that, and was now in a place where the feet and the fear of white walls were real, living things that he had to accept.

pulling him down, trying to get him inside a door and slam it behind him.	He had sunk through the thin surface of that, now moved in a region where the feet and the fear of white walls were real, living things, things he must accept. Only far inside his soul a little fire leaped and cried that something was pulling him down, trying to get him inside a door and slam it behind him. After that door was slammed there would be only footfalls and white buildings in the moonlight, and perhaps he would be one of the footfalls.	pulling him down, trying to force him through a door and close it after him.

only footfalls	Only far inside his soul a little fire leaped and cried that something was pulling him down, trying to get him inside a door and slam it behind him. After that door was slammed there would be only footfalls and white buildings in the moonlight, and perhaps he would be one of the footfalls. During the five or ten minutes he waited in the shadow of the fence, there was somehow this fire.	only footsteps

footfalls and white buildings in the moonlight, and perhaps he would be one of the footfalls.	Only far inside his soul a little fire leaped and cried that something was pulling him down, trying to get him inside a door and slam it behind him. After that door was slammed there would be only footfalls and white buildings in the moonlight, and perhaps he would be one of the footfalls. During the five or ten minutes he waited in the shadow of the fence, there was somehow this fire.	Footsteps and white buildings in the moonlight, and maybe he would become one of the footsteps.

shadow of the fence, there was somehow this fire.	After that door was slammed there would be only footfalls and white buildings in the moonlight, and perhaps he would be one of the footfalls. During the five or ten minutes he waited in the shadow of the fence, there was somehow this fire. that was as near as he could name it afterward.	In the shadow of the fence, he felt this fire inside him.

the five or ten minutes	After that door was slammed there would be only footfalls and white buildings in the moonlight, and perhaps he would be one of the footfalls. During the five or ten minutes he waited in the shadow of the fence, there was somehow this fire. that was as near as he could name it afterward.	The five or ten minutes.

name it afterward.	During the five or ten minutes he waited in the shadow of the fence, there was somehow this fire. that was as near as he could name it afterward. He remembered calling aloud: “I want someone stupid.	name it afterward.

intermingled through previous association.	shuffled. He supposed “stupid” and “good” had become somehow intermingled through previous association. When he called thus it was not an act of will at all—will had turned him away from the moving figure in the street; it was almost instinct that called, just the pile on pile of inherent tradition or some wild prayer from way over the night.	mixed together because they were previously connected.

just the pile	He supposed “stupid” and “good” had become somehow intermingled through previous association. When he called thus it was not an act of will at all—will had turned him away from the moving figure in the street; it was almost instinct that called, just the pile on pile of inherent tradition or some wild prayer from way over the night. Then something clanged like a low gong struck at a distance, and before his eyes a face flashed over the two feet, a face pale and distorted with a sort of infinite evil that twisted it like flame in the wind; but he knew, for the half instant that the gong tanged and hummed, that it was the face of Dick Humbird.	It was just the accumulation.

inherent tradition	He supposed “stupid” and “good” had become somehow intermingled through previous association. When he called thus it was not an act of will at all—will had turned him away from the moving figure in the street; it was almost instinct that called, just the pile on pile of inherent tradition or some wild prayer from way over the night. Then something clanged like a low gong struck at a distance, and before his eyes a face flashed over the two feet, a face pale and distorted with a sort of infinite evil that twisted it like flame in the wind; but he knew, for the half instant that the gong tanged and hummed, that it was the face of Dick Humbird.	Natural habit

pile on pile of inherent tradition or some wild prayer from way over the night.	He supposed “stupid” and “good” had become somehow intermingled through previous association. When he called thus it was not an act of will at all—will had turned him away from the moving figure in the street; it was almost instinct that called, just the pile on pile of inherent tradition or some wild prayer from way over the night. Then something clanged like a low gong struck at a distance, and before his eyes a face flashed over the two feet, a face pale and distorted with a sort of infinite evil that twisted it like flame in the wind; but he knew, for the half instant that the gong tanged and hummed, that it was the face of Dick Humbird.	A long history of ingrained tradition or a desperate, primal plea.

knew, for the half instant that the gong tanged and hummed, that it was the face of Dick Humbird.	When he called thus it was not an act of will at all—will had turned him away from the moving figure in the street; it was almost instinct that called, just the pile on pile of inherent tradition or some wild prayer from way over the night. Then something clanged like a low gong struck at a distance, and before his eyes a face flashed over the two feet, a face pale and distorted with a sort of infinite evil that twisted it like flame in the wind; but he knew, for the half instant that the gong tanged and hummed, that it was the face of Dick Humbird. Minutes later he sprang to his feet, realizing dimly that there was no more sound, and that he was alone in the graying alley.	knew, for the brief moment the gong rang and echoed, that it was Dick Humbird's face.

a low gong	When he called thus it was not an act of will at all—will had turned him away from the moving figure in the street; it was almost instinct that called, just the pile on pile of inherent tradition or some wild prayer from way over the night. Then something clanged like a low gong struck at a distance, and before his eyes a face flashed over the two feet, a face pale and distorted with a sort of infinite evil that twisted it like flame in the wind; but he knew, for the half instant that the gong tanged and hummed, that it was the face of Dick Humbird. Minutes later he sprang to his feet, realizing dimly that there was no more sound, and that he was alone in the graying alley.	a low gong

sprang to his feet, realizing dimly that there was no more sound, and that he was alone in the graying alley.	Then something clanged like a low gong struck at a distance, and before his eyes a face flashed over the two feet, a face pale and distorted with a sort of infinite evil that twisted it like flame in the wind; but he knew, for the half instant that the gong tanged and hummed, that it was the face of Dick Humbird. Minutes later he sprang to his feet, realizing dimly that there was no more sound, and that he was alone in the graying alley. It was cold, and he started on a steady run for the light that showed the street at the other end.	jumped up, slowly understanding that there was no more noise, and that he was alone in the darkening alley.

the graying alley	Then something clanged like a low gong struck at a distance, and before his eyes a face flashed over the two feet, a face pale and distorted with a sort of infinite evil that twisted it like flame in the wind; but he knew, for the half instant that the gong tanged and hummed, that it was the face of Dick Humbird. Minutes later he sprang to his feet, realizing dimly that there was no more sound, and that he was alone in the graying alley. It was cold, and he started on a steady run for the light that showed the street at the other end.	the alley getting dim

light that showed the street at the other end.	Minutes later he sprang to his feet, realizing dimly that there was no more sound, and that he was alone in the graying alley. It was cold, and he started on a steady run for the light that showed the street at the other end.	Light that showed the street at the end.

was late morning when he woke and found the telephone beside his bed in the hotel tolling frantically, and remembered that he had left word to be called at eleven.	It was late morning when he woke and found the telephone beside his bed in the hotel tolling frantically, and remembered that he had left word to be called at eleven. Sloane was snoring heavily, his clothes in a pile by his bed.	It was late morning when he woke up and found the telephone next to his bed in the hotel ringing loudly, and remembered that he had asked to be woken at eleven.

clothes in a pile by his bed.	It was late morning when he woke and found the telephone beside his bed in the hotel tolling frantically, and remembered that he had left word to be called at eleven. Sloane was snoring heavily, his clothes in a pile by his bed. They dressed and ate breakfast in silence, and then sauntered out to get some air.	His clothes were in a pile next to his bed.

ate breakfast in silence, and then sauntered out to get some air.	Sloane was snoring heavily, his clothes in a pile by his bed. They dressed and ate breakfast in silence, and then sauntered out to get some air. Amory’s mind was working slowly, trying to assimilate what had happened and separate from the chaotic imagery that stacked his memory the bare shreds of truth.	Ate breakfast quietly, and then strolled outside to get some air.

the bare shreds	They dressed and ate breakfast in silence, and then sauntered out to get some air. Amory’s mind was working slowly, trying to assimilate what had happened and separate from the chaotic imagery that stacked his memory the bare shreds of truth. If the morning had been cold and gray he could have grasped the reins of the past in an instant, but it was one of those days that New York gets sometimes in May, when the air on Fifth Avenue is a soft, light wine.	The essential parts

imagery that stacked his memory the bare shreds of truth.	They dressed and ate breakfast in silence, and then sauntered out to get some air. Amory’s mind was working slowly, trying to assimilate what had happened and separate from the chaotic imagery that stacked his memory the bare shreds of truth. If the morning had been cold and gray he could have grasped the reins of the past in an instant, but it was one of those days that New York gets sometimes in May, when the air on Fifth Avenue is a soft, light wine.	the images that piled up in his memory, the small bits of truth.

Amory’s mind	They dressed and ate breakfast in silence, and then sauntered out to get some air. Amory’s mind was working slowly, trying to assimilate what had happened and separate from the chaotic imagery that stacked his memory the bare shreds of truth. If the morning had been cold and gray he could have grasped the reins of the past in an instant, but it was one of those days that New York gets sometimes in May, when the air on Fifth Avenue is a soft, light wine.	Amory's mind

the chaotic imagery	They dressed and ate breakfast in silence, and then sauntered out to get some air. Amory’s mind was working slowly, trying to assimilate what had happened and separate from the chaotic imagery that stacked his memory the bare shreds of truth. If the morning had been cold and gray he could have grasped the reins of the past in an instant, but it was one of those days that New York gets sometimes in May, when the air on Fifth Avenue is a soft, light wine.	The confusing images

gets sometimes in May, when the air on Fifth Avenue is a soft, light wine.	Amory’s mind was working slowly, trying to assimilate what had happened and separate from the chaotic imagery that stacked his memory the bare shreds of truth. If the morning had been cold and gray he could have grasped the reins of the past in an instant, but it was one of those days that New York gets sometimes in May, when the air on Fifth Avenue is a soft, light wine. How much or how little Sloane remembered Amory did not care to know; he apparently had none of the nervous tension that was gripping Amory and forcing his mind back and forth like a shrieking saw.	that New York sometimes has in May, when the air on Fifth Avenue feels soft and light like wine.

forcing his mind back and forth like a shrieking saw.	If the morning had been cold and gray he could have grasped the reins of the past in an instant, but it was one of those days that New York gets sometimes in May, when the air on Fifth Avenue is a soft, light wine. How much or how little Sloane remembered Amory did not care to know; he apparently had none of the nervous tension that was gripping Amory and forcing his mind back and forth like a shrieking saw. Then Broadway broke upon them, and with the babel of noise and the painted faces a sudden sickness rushed over Amory.	making his mind jump between thoughts very quickly and loudly.

a shrieking saw	If the morning had been cold and gray he could have grasped the reins of the past in an instant, but it was one of those days that New York gets sometimes in May, when the air on Fifth Avenue is a soft, light wine. How much or how little Sloane remembered Amory did not care to know; he apparently had none of the nervous tension that was gripping Amory and forcing his mind back and forth like a shrieking saw. Then Broadway broke upon them, and with the babel of noise and the painted faces a sudden sickness rushed over Amory.	a really loud saw

sickness rushed over Amory.	How much or how little Sloane remembered Amory did not care to know; he apparently had none of the nervous tension that was gripping Amory and forcing his mind back and forth like a shrieking saw. Then Broadway broke upon them, and with the babel of noise and the painted faces a sudden sickness rushed over Amory. “For God’s sake, let’s go back!	Amory suddenly felt sick.

a sudden sickness	How much or how little Sloane remembered Amory did not care to know; he apparently had none of the nervous tension that was gripping Amory and forcing his mind back and forth like a shrieking saw. Then Broadway broke upon them, and with the babel of noise and the painted faces a sudden sickness rushed over Amory. “For God’s sake, let’s go back!	He suddenly felt sick.

God’s sake	Then Broadway broke upon them, and with the babel of noise and the painted faces a sudden sickness rushed over Amory. “For God’s sake, let’s go back! Let’s get off of this—this place!”	For God's sake

let’s go back!	Then Broadway broke upon them, and with the babel of noise and the painted faces a sudden sickness rushed over Amory. “For God’s sake, let’s go back! Let’s get off of this—this place!”	Let's go back!

looked at him in amazement.	Let’s get off of this—this place!” Sloane looked at him in amazement. “What do you mean?”	She looked at him, surprised.

act like a maniac last night, you’re never coming on Broadway again?”	let’s get back to the Avenue!” “Do you mean to say,” said Sloane stolidly, “that ’cause you had some sort of indigestion that made you act like a maniac last night, you’re never coming on Broadway again?” Simultaneously Amory classed him with the crowd, and he seemed no longer Sloane of the debonair humor and the happy personality, but only one of the evil faces that whirled along the turbid stream.	You're saying that because you felt sick and acted crazy last night, you'll never go to Broadway again?

the turbid stream	“Do you mean to say,” said Sloane stolidly, “that ’cause you had some sort of indigestion that made you act like a maniac last night, you’re never coming on Broadway again?” Simultaneously Amory classed him with the crowd, and he seemed no longer Sloane of the debonair humor and the happy personality, but only one of the evil faces that whirled along the turbid stream. “Man!”	the muddy flow

the debonair humor	“Do you mean to say,” said Sloane stolidly, “that ’cause you had some sort of indigestion that made you act like a maniac last night, you’re never coming on Broadway again?” Simultaneously Amory classed him with the crowd, and he seemed no longer Sloane of the debonair humor and the happy personality, but only one of the evil faces that whirled along the turbid stream. “Man!”	The charming humor.

classed him with the crowd, and he seemed no longer Sloane of the debonair humor and the happy personality, but only one of the evil faces that whirled along the turbid stream.	“Do you mean to say,” said Sloane stolidly, “that ’cause you had some sort of indigestion that made you act like a maniac last night, you’re never coming on Broadway again?” Simultaneously Amory classed him with the crowd, and he seemed no longer Sloane of the debonair humor and the happy personality, but only one of the evil faces that whirled along the turbid stream. “Man!”	He put Sloane in with the rest of them, and Sloane no longer seemed like the charming and funny person he knew, but just another one of the bad people in the chaotic mess.

see it, you’re filthy, too!”	“Man!” he shouted so loud that the people on the corner turned and followed them with their eyes, “it’s filthy, and if you can’t see it, you’re filthy, too!” “I can’t help it,” said Sloane doggedly.	If you can't see it, you're also disgusting!

’s the matter with you?	“I can’t help it,” said Sloane doggedly. “What’s the matter with you? Old remorse getting you?	What's wrong with you?

Old remorse	“What’s the matter with you? Old remorse getting you? You’d be in a fine state if you’d gone through with our little party.”	Regret

remorse getting you?	“What’s the matter with you? Old remorse getting you? You’d be in a fine state if you’d gone through with our little party.”	Are you feeling guilty?

be in a fine state if you’d gone through with our little party.”	Old remorse getting you? You’d be in a fine state if you’d gone through with our little party.” “I’m going, Fred,” said Amory slowly.	You'd be in a bad way if you had gone through with our party.

keel over where he stood.	“I’m going, Fred,” said Amory slowly. His knees were shaking under him, and he knew that if he stayed another minute on this street he would keel over where he stood. “I’ll be at the Vanderbilt for lunch.”	fall over where he was standing.

be at the Vanderbilt for lunch.”	His knees were shaking under him, and he knew that if he stayed another minute on this street he would keel over where he stood. “I’ll be at the Vanderbilt for lunch.” And he strode rapidly off and turned over to Fifth Avenue.	I'll be at the Vanderbilt for lunch.

Axia’s sidelong, suggestive smile	And he strode rapidly off and turned over to Fifth Avenue. Back at the hotel he felt better, but as he walked into the barbershop, intending to get a head massage, the smell of the powders and tonics brought back Axia’s sidelong, suggestive smile, and he left hurriedly. In the doorway of his room a sudden blackness flowed around him like a divided river.	Axia's sly, suggestive smile

Back at the hotel he felt better, but as he walked into the barbershop, intending to get a head massage, the smell of the powders and tonics brought back Axia’s sidelong, suggestive smile, and he left hurriedly.	And he strode rapidly off and turned over to Fifth Avenue. Back at the hotel he felt better, but as he walked into the barbershop, intending to get a head massage, the smell of the powders and tonics brought back Axia’s sidelong, suggestive smile, and he left hurriedly. In the doorway of his room a sudden blackness flowed around him like a divided river.	He felt better at the hotel, but when he went into the barbershop for a head massage, the smell of the products reminded him of Axia's flirtatious smile, and he quickly left.

a sudden blackness	Back at the hotel he felt better, but as he walked into the barbershop, intending to get a head massage, the smell of the powders and tonics brought back Axia’s sidelong, suggestive smile, and he left hurriedly. In the doorway of his room a sudden blackness flowed around him like a divided river. When he came to himself he knew that several hours had passed.	He suddenly felt very dark.

flowed around him like a divided river.	Back at the hotel he felt better, but as he walked into the barbershop, intending to get a head massage, the smell of the powders and tonics brought back Axia’s sidelong, suggestive smile, and he left hurriedly. In the doorway of his room a sudden blackness flowed around him like a divided river. When he came to himself he knew that several hours had passed.	surrounded him like a split river.

pitched onto the bed and rolled over on his face with a deadly fear that he was going mad.	When he came to himself he knew that several hours had passed. He pitched onto the bed and rolled over on his face with a deadly fear that he was going mad. He wanted people, people, someone sane and stupid and good.	He fell onto the bed and turned over, burying his face, terrified that he was losing his mind.

veins on his forehead standing out, and his terror had hardened on him like plaster.	He lay for he knew not how long without moving. He could feel the little hot veins on his forehead standing out, and his terror had hardened on him like plaster. He felt he was passing up again through the thin crust of horror, and now only could he distinguish the shadowy twilight he was leaving.	The veins on his forehead were sticking out, and his terror had become hard on him like plaster.

the little hot veins	He lay for he knew not how long without moving. He could feel the little hot veins on his forehead standing out, and his terror had hardened on him like plaster. He felt he was passing up again through the thin crust of horror, and now only could he distinguish the shadowy twilight he was leaving.	The small, warm veins

the shadowy twilight	He could feel the little hot veins on his forehead standing out, and his terror had hardened on him like plaster. He felt he was passing up again through the thin crust of horror, and now only could he distinguish the shadowy twilight he was leaving. He must have fallen asleep again, for when he next recollected himself he had paid the hotel bill and was stepping into a taxi at the door.	the dim shadows

the thin crust	He could feel the little hot veins on his forehead standing out, and his terror had hardened on him like plaster. He felt he was passing up again through the thin crust of horror, and now only could he distinguish the shadowy twilight he was leaving. He must have fallen asleep again, for when he next recollected himself he had paid the hotel bill and was stepping into a taxi at the door.	the surface of fear

twilight he was leaving.	He could feel the little hot veins on his forehead standing out, and his terror had hardened on him like plaster. He felt he was passing up again through the thin crust of horror, and now only could he distinguish the shadowy twilight he was leaving. He must have fallen asleep again, for when he next recollected himself he had paid the hotel bill and was stepping into a taxi at the door.	the shadowy twilight he was leaving.

stepping into a taxi at the door.	He felt he was passing up again through the thin crust of horror, and now only could he distinguish the shadowy twilight he was leaving. He must have fallen asleep again, for when he next recollected himself he had paid the hotel bill and was stepping into a taxi at the door. It was raining torrents.	Getting into a taxi at the door.

one he knew, only a crowd of fagged-looking Philadelphians.	It was raining torrents. On the train for Princeton he saw no one he knew, only a crowd of fagged-looking Philadelphians. The presence of a painted woman across the aisle filled him with a fresh burst of sickness and he changed to another car, tried to concentrate on an article in a popular magazine.	anyone he knew, only a group of tired-looking people from Philadelphia.

fagged-looking Philadelphians	It was raining torrents. On the train for Princeton he saw no one he knew, only a crowd of fagged-looking Philadelphians. The presence of a painted woman across the aisle filled him with a fresh burst of sickness and he changed to another car, tried to concentrate on an article in a popular magazine.	Tired-looking people from Philadelphia

article in a popular magazine.	On the train for Princeton he saw no one he knew, only a crowd of fagged-looking Philadelphians. The presence of a painted woman across the aisle filled him with a fresh burst of sickness and he changed to another car, tried to concentrate on an article in a popular magazine. He found himself reading the same paragraphs over and over, so he abandoned this attempt and leaning over wearily pressed his hot forehead against the damp windowpane.	An article in a popular magazine.

the damp windowpane	The presence of a painted woman across the aisle filled him with a fresh burst of sickness and he changed to another car, tried to concentrate on an article in a popular magazine. He found himself reading the same paragraphs over and over, so he abandoned this attempt and leaning over wearily pressed his hot forehead against the damp windowpane. The car, a smoker, was hot and stuffy with most of the smells of the state’s alien population; he opened a window and shivered against the cloud of fog that drifted in over him.	the wet window

pressed his hot forehead against the damp windowpane.	The presence of a painted woman across the aisle filled him with a fresh burst of sickness and he changed to another car, tried to concentrate on an article in a popular magazine. He found himself reading the same paragraphs over and over, so he abandoned this attempt and leaning over wearily pressed his hot forehead against the damp windowpane. The car, a smoker, was hot and stuffy with most of the smells of the state’s alien population; he opened a window and shivered against the cloud of fog that drifted in over him.	pressed his hot forehead against the damp window.

his hot forehead	The presence of a painted woman across the aisle filled him with a fresh burst of sickness and he changed to another car, tried to concentrate on an article in a popular magazine. He found himself reading the same paragraphs over and over, so he abandoned this attempt and leaning over wearily pressed his hot forehead against the damp windowpane. The car, a smoker, was hot and stuffy with most of the smells of the state’s alien population; he opened a window and shivered against the cloud of fog that drifted in over him.	His hot forehead

shivered against the cloud of fog that drifted in over him.	He found himself reading the same paragraphs over and over, so he abandoned this attempt and leaning over wearily pressed his hot forehead against the damp windowpane. The car, a smoker, was hot and stuffy with most of the smells of the state’s alien population; he opened a window and shivered against the cloud of fog that drifted in over him. The two hours’ ride were like days, and he nearly cried aloud with joy when the towers of Princeton loomed up beside him and the yellow squares of light filtered through the blue rain.	shivered from the fog that blew in.

the state’s alien population	He found himself reading the same paragraphs over and over, so he abandoned this attempt and leaning over wearily pressed his hot forehead against the damp windowpane. The car, a smoker, was hot and stuffy with most of the smells of the state’s alien population; he opened a window and shivered against the cloud of fog that drifted in over him. The two hours’ ride were like days, and he nearly cried aloud with joy when the towers of Princeton loomed up beside him and the yellow squares of light filtered through the blue rain.	the people who were different in the state

towers of Princeton loomed up beside him and the yellow squares of light filtered through the blue rain.	The car, a smoker, was hot and stuffy with most of the smells of the state’s alien population; he opened a window and shivered against the cloud of fog that drifted in over him. The two hours’ ride were like days, and he nearly cried aloud with joy when the towers of Princeton loomed up beside him and the yellow squares of light filtered through the blue rain. Tom was standing in the centre of the room, pensively relighting a cigar-stub.	The Princeton towers appeared beside him, and the yellow squares of light shone through the blue rain.

centre of the room, pensively relighting a cigar-stub.	The two hours’ ride were like days, and he nearly cried aloud with joy when the towers of Princeton loomed up beside him and the yellow squares of light filtered through the blue rain. Tom was standing in the centre of the room, pensively relighting a cigar-stub. Amory fancied he looked rather relieved on seeing him.	In the middle of the room, he was thoughtfully relighting a small cigar.

a cigar-stub	The two hours’ ride were like days, and he nearly cried aloud with joy when the towers of Princeton loomed up beside him and the yellow squares of light filtered through the blue rain. Tom was standing in the centre of the room, pensively relighting a cigar-stub. Amory fancied he looked rather relieved on seeing him.	A short piece of cigar.

relieved on seeing him.	Tom was standing in the centre of the room, pensively relighting a cigar-stub. Amory fancied he looked rather relieved on seeing him. “Had a hell of a dream about you last night,” came in the cracked voice through the cigar smoke.	Relieved to see him.

came in the cracked voice through the cigar smoke.	Amory fancied he looked rather relieved on seeing him. “Had a hell of a dream about you last night,” came in the cracked voice through the cigar smoke. “I had an idea you were in some trouble.”	The cracked voice said through the cigar smoke.

the cigar smoke	Amory fancied he looked rather relieved on seeing him. “Had a hell of a dream about you last night,” came in the cracked voice through the cigar smoke. “I had an idea you were in some trouble.”	the cigar smoke

looked at him queerly and then sank into a chair and opened his Italian notebook.	“Don’t say a word; I’m tired and pepped out.” Tom looked at him queerly and then sank into a chair and opened his Italian notebook. Amory threw his coat and hat on the floor, loosened his collar, and took a Wells novel at random from the shelf.	looked at him strangely, then sat down in a chair and opened his Italian notebook.

threw his coat and hat on the floor, loosened his collar, and took a Wells novel at random from the shelf.	Tom looked at him queerly and then sank into a chair and opened his Italian notebook. Amory threw his coat and hat on the floor, loosened his collar, and took a Wells novel at random from the shelf. “Wells is sane,” he thought, “and if he won’t do I’ll read Rupert Brooke.”	He threw his coat and hat on the floor, loosened his collar, and grabbed a Wells novel randomly from the shelf.

do I’ll read Rupert Brooke.”	Amory threw his coat and hat on the floor, loosened his collar, and took a Wells novel at random from the shelf. “Wells is sane,” he thought, “and if he won’t do I’ll read Rupert Brooke.” Half an hour passed.	or I'll read Rupert Brooke.

clawed with their fingernails at the windowpane.	Half an hour passed. Outside the wind came up, and Amory started as the wet branches moved and clawed with their fingernails at the windowpane. Tom was deep in his work, and inside the room only the occasional scratch of a match or the rustle of leather as they shifted in their chairs broke the stillness.	scratched the window.

scratch of a match or the rustle of leather as they shifted in their chairs broke the stillness.	Outside the wind came up, and Amory started as the wet branches moved and clawed with their fingernails at the windowpane. Tom was deep in his work, and inside the room only the occasional scratch of a match or the rustle of leather as they shifted in their chairs broke the stillness. Then like a zigzag of lightning came the change.	The sound of a match being struck or leather rustling as they moved in their chairs broke the silence.

zigzag of lightning came the change.	Tom was deep in his work, and inside the room only the occasional scratch of a match or the rustle of leather as they shifted in their chairs broke the stillness. Then like a zigzag of lightning came the change. Amory sat bolt upright, frozen cold in his chair.	The change happened suddenly, like lightning.

sat bolt upright, frozen cold in his chair.	Then like a zigzag of lightning came the change. Amory sat bolt upright, frozen cold in his chair. Tom was looking at him with his mouth drooping, eyes fixed.	Sat straight up, very cold in his chair.

looking at him with his mouth drooping, eyes fixed.	Amory sat bolt upright, frozen cold in his chair. Tom was looking at him with his mouth drooping, eyes fixed. “God help us!”	He was staring at him, mouth open, eyes locked on him.

a flash Amory	“Oh, my heavens!” shouted Tom, “look behind!” Quick as a flash Amory whirled around. He saw nothing but the dark windowpane.	Amory quickly.

nothing but the dark windowpane.	Quick as a flash Amory whirled around. He saw nothing but the dark windowpane. “It’s gone now,” came Tom’s voice after a second in a still terror.	Only the dark window.

the dark windowpane	Quick as a flash Amory whirled around. He saw nothing but the dark windowpane. “It’s gone now,” came Tom’s voice after a second in a still terror.	The dark window.

Tom’s voice	He saw nothing but the dark windowpane. “It’s gone now,” came Tom’s voice after a second in a still terror. “Something was looking at you.”	Tom spoke.

came Tom’s voice after a second in a still terror.	He saw nothing but the dark windowpane. “It’s gone now,” came Tom’s voice after a second in a still terror. “Something was looking at you.”	Tom's voice came after a moment, still terrified.

dropped into his chair again.	“Something was looking at you.” Trembling violently, Amory dropped into his chair again. “I’ve got to tell you,” he said.	sat back down in his chair.

out of Witherspoon Hall, and the Princetonian fell against the door, and the May birds hailed the sun on last night’s rain.	And he gave Tom the story. It was midnight when he finished, and after that, with all lights burning, two sleepy, shivering boys read to each other from The New Machiavelli, until dawn came up out of Witherspoon Hall, and the Princetonian fell against the door, and the May birds hailed the sun on last night’s rain.	Out of Witherspoon Hall, and the Princeton newspaper fell against the door, and the birds of May greeted the sun after last night's rain.

shivering boys	And he gave Tom the story. It was midnight when he finished, and after that, with all lights burning, two sleepy, shivering boys read to each other from The New Machiavelli, until dawn came up out of Witherspoon Hall, and the Princetonian fell against the door, and the May birds hailed the sun on last night’s rain.	Cold boys

The New Machiavelli	And he gave Tom the story. It was midnight when he finished, and after that, with all lights burning, two sleepy, shivering boys read to each other from The New Machiavelli, until dawn came up out of Witherspoon Hall, and the Princetonian fell against the door, and the May birds hailed the sun on last night’s rain.	The New Machiavelli

last night’s rain	And he gave Tom the story. It was midnight when he finished, and after that, with all lights burning, two sleepy, shivering boys read to each other from The New Machiavelli, until dawn came up out of Witherspoon Hall, and the Princetonian fell against the door, and the May birds hailed the sun on last night’s rain.	The rain from the night before.

means than night parades, certain individuals arrived who stirred it to its plethoric depths.	During Princeton’s transition period, that is, during Amory’s last two years there, while he saw it change and broaden and live up to its Gothic beauty by better means than night parades, certain individuals arrived who stirred it to its plethoric depths. Some of them had been freshmen, and wild freshmen, with Amory; some were in the class below; and it was in the beginning of his last year and around small tables at the Nassau Inn that they began questioning aloud the institutions that Amory and countless others before him had questioned so long in secret.	better than night parades, certain people arrived who deeply affected it.

its plethoric depths	During Princeton’s transition period, that is, during Amory’s last two years there, while he saw it change and broaden and live up to its Gothic beauty by better means than night parades, certain individuals arrived who stirred it to its plethoric depths. Some of them had been freshmen, and wild freshmen, with Amory; some were in the class below; and it was in the beginning of his last year and around small tables at the Nassau Inn that they began questioning aloud the institutions that Amory and countless others before him had questioned so long in secret.	its fullest extent

Princeton’s transition period	During Princeton’s transition period, that is, during Amory’s last two years there, while he saw it change and broaden and live up to its Gothic beauty by better means than night parades, certain individuals arrived who stirred it to its plethoric depths. Some of them had been freshmen, and wild freshmen, with Amory; some were in the class below; and it was in the beginning of his last year and around small tables at the Nassau Inn that they began questioning aloud the institutions that Amory and countless others before him had questioned so long in secret.	The time of change at Princeton

Amory’s last two years	During Princeton’s transition period, that is, during Amory’s last two years there, while he saw it change and broaden and live up to its Gothic beauty by better means than night parades, certain individuals arrived who stirred it to its plethoric depths. Some of them had been freshmen, and wild freshmen, with Amory; some were in the class below; and it was in the beginning of his last year and around small tables at the Nassau Inn that they began questioning aloud the institutions that Amory and countless others before him had questioned so long in secret.	His last two years

countless others	During Princeton’s transition period, that is, during Amory’s last two years there, while he saw it change and broaden and live up to its Gothic beauty by better means than night parades, certain individuals arrived who stirred it to its plethoric depths. Some of them had been freshmen, and wild freshmen, with Amory; some were in the class below; and it was in the beginning of his last year and around small tables at the Nassau Inn that they began questioning aloud the institutions that Amory and countless others before him had questioned so long in secret. First, and partly by accident, they struck on certain books, a definite type of biographical novel that Amory christened “quest” books.	many others

the Nassau Inn	During Princeton’s transition period, that is, during Amory’s last two years there, while he saw it change and broaden and live up to its Gothic beauty by better means than night parades, certain individuals arrived who stirred it to its plethoric depths. Some of them had been freshmen, and wild freshmen, with Amory; some were in the class below; and it was in the beginning of his last year and around small tables at the Nassau Inn that they began questioning aloud the institutions that Amory and countless others before him had questioned so long in secret. First, and partly by accident, they struck on certain books, a definite type of biographical novel that Amory christened “quest” books.	The Nassau Inn

institutions that Amory and countless others before him had questioned so long in secret.	During Princeton’s transition period, that is, during Amory’s last two years there, while he saw it change and broaden and live up to its Gothic beauty by better means than night parades, certain individuals arrived who stirred it to its plethoric depths. Some of them had been freshmen, and wild freshmen, with Amory; some were in the class below; and it was in the beginning of his last year and around small tables at the Nassau Inn that they began questioning aloud the institutions that Amory and countless others before him had questioned so long in secret. First, and partly by accident, they struck on certain books, a definite type of biographical novel that Amory christened “quest” books.	the things that Amory and many others before him had secretly questioned for a long time.

wild freshmen	During Princeton’s transition period, that is, during Amory’s last two years there, while he saw it change and broaden and live up to its Gothic beauty by better means than night parades, certain individuals arrived who stirred it to its plethoric depths. Some of them had been freshmen, and wild freshmen, with Amory; some were in the class below; and it was in the beginning of his last year and around small tables at the Nassau Inn that they began questioning aloud the institutions that Amory and countless others before him had questioned so long in secret. First, and partly by accident, they struck on certain books, a definite type of biographical novel that Amory christened “quest” books.	Rebellious freshmen

a definite type	Some of them had been freshmen, and wild freshmen, with Amory; some were in the class below; and it was in the beginning of his last year and around small tables at the Nassau Inn that they began questioning aloud the institutions that Amory and countless others before him had questioned so long in secret. First, and partly by accident, they struck on certain books, a definite type of biographical novel that Amory christened “quest” books. In the “quest” book the hero set off in life armed with the best weapons and avowedly intending to use them as such weapons are usually used, to push their possessors ahead as selfishly and blindly as possible, but the heroes of the “quest” books discovered that there might be a more magnificent use for them.	a specific kind

biographical novel	Some of them had been freshmen, and wild freshmen, with Amory; some were in the class below; and it was in the beginning of his last year and around small tables at the Nassau Inn that they began questioning aloud the institutions that Amory and countless others before him had questioned so long in secret. First, and partly by accident, they struck on certain books, a definite type of biographical novel that Amory christened “quest” books. In the “quest” book the hero set off in life armed with the best weapons and avowedly intending to use them as such weapons are usually used, to push their possessors ahead as selfishly and blindly as possible, but the heroes of the “quest” books discovered that there might be a more magnificent use for them.	A novel about someone's life

type of biographical novel that Amory christened “quest” books.	Some of them had been freshmen, and wild freshmen, with Amory; some were in the class below; and it was in the beginning of his last year and around small tables at the Nassau Inn that they began questioning aloud the institutions that Amory and countless others before him had questioned so long in secret. First, and partly by accident, they struck on certain books, a definite type of biographical novel that Amory christened “quest” books. In the “quest” book the hero set off in life armed with the best weapons and avowedly intending to use them as such weapons are usually used, to push their possessors ahead as selfishly and blindly as possible, but the heroes of the “quest” books discovered that there might be a more magnificent use for them.	a type of biographical novel that Amory called “quest” books.

use them as such weapons are usually used, to push their possessors ahead as selfishly and blindly as possible, but the heroes of the “quest” books discovered that there might be a more magnificent use for them.	First, and partly by accident, they struck on certain books, a definite type of biographical novel that Amory christened “quest” books. In the “quest” book the hero set off in life armed with the best weapons and avowedly intending to use them as such weapons are usually used, to push their possessors ahead as selfishly and blindly as possible, but the heroes of the “quest” books discovered that there might be a more magnificent use for them. None Other Gods, Sinister Street, and The Research Magnificent were examples of such books; it was the latter of these three that gripped Burne Holiday and made him wonder in the beginning of senior year how much it was worth while being a diplomatic autocrat around his club on Prospect Avenue and basking in the high lights of class office.	use them the way those weapons are usually used, to help the people who have them get ahead in a selfish and thoughtless way. But the heroes of the "quest" books found out they could be used for something greater.

basking in the high lights of class office.	In the “quest” book the hero set off in life armed with the best weapons and avowedly intending to use them as such weapons are usually used, to push their possessors ahead as selfishly and blindly as possible, but the heroes of the “quest” books discovered that there might be a more magnificent use for them. None Other Gods, Sinister Street, and The Research Magnificent were examples of such books; it was the latter of these three that gripped Burne Holiday and made him wonder in the beginning of senior year how much it was worth while being a diplomatic autocrat around his club on Prospect Avenue and basking in the high lights of class office. It was distinctly through the channels of aristocracy that Burne found his way.	enjoying the attention and prestige of holding a class office.

a diplomatic autocrat	In the “quest” book the hero set off in life armed with the best weapons and avowedly intending to use them as such weapons are usually used, to push their possessors ahead as selfishly and blindly as possible, but the heroes of the “quest” books discovered that there might be a more magnificent use for them. None Other Gods, Sinister Street, and The Research Magnificent were examples of such books; it was the latter of these three that gripped Burne Holiday and made him wonder in the beginning of senior year how much it was worth while being a diplomatic autocrat around his club on Prospect Avenue and basking in the high lights of class office. It was distinctly through the channels of aristocracy that Burne found his way.	a bossy person in a club

was distinctly through the channels of aristocracy that Burne found his way.	None Other Gods, Sinister Street, and The Research Magnificent were examples of such books; it was the latter of these three that gripped Burne Holiday and made him wonder in the beginning of senior year how much it was worth while being a diplomatic autocrat around his club on Prospect Avenue and basking in the high lights of class office. It was distinctly through the channels of aristocracy that Burne found his way. Amory, through Kerry, had had a vague drifting acquaintance with him, but not until January of senior year did their friendship commence.	Burne definitely achieved success through his connections with upper-class society.

January of senior year did their friendship commence.	It was distinctly through the channels of aristocracy that Burne found his way. Amory, through Kerry, had had a vague drifting acquaintance with him, but not until January of senior year did their friendship commence. “Heard the latest?” said Tom, coming in late one drizzly evening with that triumphant air he always wore after a successful conversational bout.	Their friendship started in January of their senior year.

their friendship commence	It was distinctly through the channels of aristocracy that Burne found his way. Amory, through Kerry, had had a vague drifting acquaintance with him, but not until January of senior year did their friendship commence. “Heard the latest?” said Tom, coming in late one drizzly evening with that triumphant air he always wore after a successful conversational bout.	Their friendship began.

a vague drifting acquaintance	It was distinctly through the channels of aristocracy that Burne found his way. Amory, through Kerry, had had a vague drifting acquaintance with him, but not until January of senior year did their friendship commence. “Heard the latest?” said Tom, coming in late one drizzly evening with that triumphant air he always wore after a successful conversational bout.	A hazy, casual acquaintance

that triumphant air	Amory, through Kerry, had had a vague drifting acquaintance with him, but not until January of senior year did their friendship commence. “Heard the latest?” said Tom, coming in late one drizzly evening with that triumphant air he always wore after a successful conversational bout. “No.	That triumphant look

late one drizzly evening	Amory, through Kerry, had had a vague drifting acquaintance with him, but not until January of senior year did their friendship commence. “Heard the latest?” said Tom, coming in late one drizzly evening with that triumphant air he always wore after a successful conversational bout. “No.	late one rainy evening

a successful conversational bout	Amory, through Kerry, had had a vague drifting acquaintance with him, but not until January of senior year did their friendship commence. “Heard the latest?” said Tom, coming in late one drizzly evening with that triumphant air he always wore after a successful conversational bout. “No.	A good conversation.

coming in late one drizzly evening with that triumphant air he always wore after a successful conversational bout.	Amory, through Kerry, had had a vague drifting acquaintance with him, but not until January of senior year did their friendship commence. “Heard the latest?” said Tom, coming in late one drizzly evening with that triumphant air he always wore after a successful conversational bout. “No.	He came in late one drizzly evening with that triumphant look he always had after a good conversation.

third of the junior class are going to resign from their clubs.”	“Worse than that. About one-third of the junior class are going to resign from their clubs.” “What!”	One-third of the junior class are going to quit their clubs.

holding a meeting tonight to see if they can find a joint means of combating it.”	Burne Holiday is behind it. The club presidents are holding a meeting tonight to see if they can find a joint means of combating it.” “Well, what’s the idea of the thing?”	They're having a meeting tonight to find a way to fight it together.

get sometimes from disappointed sophomores.	“Well, what’s the idea of the thing?” “Oh, clubs injurious to Princeton democracy; cost a lot; draw social lines, take time; the regular line you get sometimes from disappointed sophomores. Woodrow thought they should be abolished and all that.”	That's what you sometimes hear from sophomores who didn't get in.

disappointed sophomores	“Well, what’s the idea of the thing?” “Oh, clubs injurious to Princeton democracy; cost a lot; draw social lines, take time; the regular line you get sometimes from disappointed sophomores. Woodrow thought they should be abolished and all that.”	Sophomores who are upset

Pete’s sake	I think it’ll go through.” “For Pete’s sake, tell me more about it.” “Well,” began Tom, “it seems that the idea developed simultaneously in several heads.	For goodness sake

developed simultaneously in several heads.	“For Pete’s sake, tell me more about it.” “Well,” began Tom, “it seems that the idea developed simultaneously in several heads. I was talking to Burne awhile ago, and he claims that it’s a logical result if an intelligent person thinks long enough about the social system.	It developed in several people's minds at the same time.

thinks long enough about the social system.	“Well,” began Tom, “it seems that the idea developed simultaneously in several heads. I was talking to Burne awhile ago, and he claims that it’s a logical result if an intelligent person thinks long enough about the social system. They had a ‘discussion crowd’ and the point of abolishing the clubs was brought up by someone—everybody there leaped at it—it had been in each one’s mind, more or less, and it just needed a spark to bring it out.”	thinks about society for a long time.

needed a spark to bring it out.”	I was talking to Burne awhile ago, and he claims that it’s a logical result if an intelligent person thinks long enough about the social system. They had a ‘discussion crowd’ and the point of abolishing the clubs was brought up by someone—everybody there leaped at it—it had been in each one’s mind, more or less, and it just needed a spark to bring it out.” “Fine!	needed a spark to bring it out.

each one’s mind	I was talking to Burne awhile ago, and he claims that it’s a logical result if an intelligent person thinks long enough about the social system. They had a ‘discussion crowd’ and the point of abolishing the clubs was brought up by someone—everybody there leaped at it—it had been in each one’s mind, more or less, and it just needed a spark to bring it out.” “Fine!	Everyone's mind

feel up at Cap and Gown?”	I swear I think it’ll be most entertaining. How do they feel up at Cap and Gown?” “Wild, of course.	How do they feel at Cap and Gown?

same at all the clubs; I’ve been the rounds.	Everyone’s been sitting and arguing and swearing and getting mad and getting sentimental and getting brutal. It’s the same at all the clubs; I’ve been the rounds. They get one of the radicals in the corner and fire questions at him.”	It's the same at all the clubs; I've visited them all.

the corner and fire questions	It’s the same at all the clubs; I’ve been the rounds. They get one of the radicals in the corner and fire questions at him.” “How do the radicals stand up?”	They put him in the corner and ask him questions.

get one of the radicals in the corner and fire questions at him.”	It’s the same at all the clubs; I’ve been the rounds. They get one of the radicals in the corner and fire questions at him.” “How do the radicals stand up?”	They get one of the radicals in the corner and ask him questions.

Burne’s a damn good talker	“Oh, moderately well. Burne’s a damn good talker, and so obviously sincere that you can’t get anywhere with him. It’s so evident that resigning from his club means so much more to him than preventing it does to us that I felt futile when I argued; finally took a position that was brilliantly neutral.	Burne is a very good speaker.

preventing it does to us that I felt futile when I argued; finally took a position that was brilliantly neutral.	Burne’s a damn good talker, and so obviously sincere that you can’t get anywhere with him. It’s so evident that resigning from his club means so much more to him than preventing it does to us that I felt futile when I argued; finally took a position that was brilliantly neutral. In fact, I believe Burne thought for a while that he’d converted me.”	Preventing it from happening mattered less to us than it did to him, so arguing felt pointless. I finally took a perfectly neutral stance.

thought for a while that he’d converted me.”	It’s so evident that resigning from his club means so much more to him than preventing it does to us that I felt futile when I argued; finally took a position that was brilliantly neutral. In fact, I believe Burne thought for a while that he’d converted me.” “And you say almost a third of the junior class are going to resign?”	thought for a while that he'd convinced me."

third of the junior class are going to resign?”	In fact, I believe Burne thought for a while that he’d converted me.” “And you say almost a third of the junior class are going to resign?” “Call it a fourth and be safe.”	A third of the junior class are going to quit?

a brisk knock	“Lord—who’d have thought it possible!” There was a brisk knock at the door, and Burne himself came in. “Hello, Amory—hello, Tom.”	A quick knock

knock at the door, and Burne himself came in.	“Lord—who’d have thought it possible!” There was a brisk knock at the door, and Burne himself came in. “Hello, Amory—hello, Tom.”	Burne knocked at the door and came in.

“Evening, Burne	Amory rose. “Evening, Burne. Don’t mind if I seem to rush; I’m going to Renwick’s.”	"Hello, Burne."

going to Renwick’s.”	“Evening, Burne. Don’t mind if I seem to rush; I’m going to Renwick’s.” Burne turned to him quickly.	I'm going to Renwick's.

this keen enthusiasm	Amory sat down again, and as Burne perched on a table and launched into argument with Tom, he looked at this revolutionary more carefully than he ever had before. Broad-browed and strong-chinned, with a fineness in the honest gray eyes that were like Kerry’s, Burne was a man who gave an immediate impression of bigness and security—stubborn, that was evident, but his stubbornness wore no stolidity, and when he had talked for five minutes Amory knew that this keen enthusiasm had in it no quality of dilettantism. The intense power Amory felt later in Burne Holiday differed from the admiration he had had for Humbird.	this strong passion

man who gave an immediate impression of bigness and security—stubborn, that was evident, but his stubbornness wore no stolidity, and when he had talked for five minutes Amory knew that this keen enthusiasm had in it no quality of dilettantism.	Amory sat down again, and as Burne perched on a table and launched into argument with Tom, he looked at this revolutionary more carefully than he ever had before. Broad-browed and strong-chinned, with a fineness in the honest gray eyes that were like Kerry’s, Burne was a man who gave an immediate impression of bigness and security—stubborn, that was evident, but his stubbornness wore no stolidity, and when he had talked for five minutes Amory knew that this keen enthusiasm had in it no quality of dilettantism. The intense power Amory felt later in Burne Holiday differed from the admiration he had had for Humbird.	He gave an immediate impression of being large and safe—stubborn, which was obvious, but his stubbornness wasn't dull, and after he'd talked for five minutes, Amory knew this strong enthusiasm wasn't superficial.

differed from the admiration he had had for Humbird.	Broad-browed and strong-chinned, with a fineness in the honest gray eyes that were like Kerry’s, Burne was a man who gave an immediate impression of bigness and security—stubborn, that was evident, but his stubbornness wore no stolidity, and when he had talked for five minutes Amory knew that this keen enthusiasm had in it no quality of dilettantism. The intense power Amory felt later in Burne Holiday differed from the admiration he had had for Humbird. This time it began as purely a mental interest.	was different from the admiration he had felt for Humbird.

as purely a mental interest	The intense power Amory felt later in Burne Holiday differed from the admiration he had had for Humbird. This time it began as purely a mental interest. With other men of whom he had thought as primarily first-class, he had been attracted first by their personalities, and in Burne he missed that immediate magnetism to which he usually swore allegiance.	as just a thought

that immediate magnetism	This time it began as purely a mental interest. With other men of whom he had thought as primarily first-class, he had been attracted first by their personalities, and in Burne he missed that immediate magnetism to which he usually swore allegiance. But that night Amory was struck by Burne’s intense earnestness, a quality he was accustomed to associate only with the dread stupidity, and by the great enthusiasm that struck dead chords in his heart.	that instant attraction

thought as primarily first-class, he had been attracted first by their personalities, and in Burne he missed that immediate magnetism to which he usually swore allegiance.	This time it began as purely a mental interest. With other men of whom he had thought as primarily first-class, he had been attracted first by their personalities, and in Burne he missed that immediate magnetism to which he usually swore allegiance. But that night Amory was struck by Burne’s intense earnestness, a quality he was accustomed to associate only with the dread stupidity, and by the great enthusiasm that struck dead chords in his heart.	He was usually drawn to people he considered excellent because of their personalities, but he didn't feel that immediate connection with Burne.

the great enthusiasm	With other men of whom he had thought as primarily first-class, he had been attracted first by their personalities, and in Burne he missed that immediate magnetism to which he usually swore allegiance. But that night Amory was struck by Burne’s intense earnestness, a quality he was accustomed to associate only with the dread stupidity, and by the great enthusiasm that struck dead chords in his heart. Burne stood vaguely for a land Amory hoped he was drifting toward—and it was almost time that land was in sight.	The strong excitement.

the dread stupidity	With other men of whom he had thought as primarily first-class, he had been attracted first by their personalities, and in Burne he missed that immediate magnetism to which he usually swore allegiance. But that night Amory was struck by Burne’s intense earnestness, a quality he was accustomed to associate only with the dread stupidity, and by the great enthusiasm that struck dead chords in his heart. Burne stood vaguely for a land Amory hoped he was drifting toward—and it was almost time that land was in sight.	extreme lack of intelligence

dead chords	With other men of whom he had thought as primarily first-class, he had been attracted first by their personalities, and in Burne he missed that immediate magnetism to which he usually swore allegiance. But that night Amory was struck by Burne’s intense earnestness, a quality he was accustomed to associate only with the dread stupidity, and by the great enthusiasm that struck dead chords in his heart. Burne stood vaguely for a land Amory hoped he was drifting toward—and it was almost time that land was in sight.	Unresponsive feelings

Burne’s intense earnestness	With other men of whom he had thought as primarily first-class, he had been attracted first by their personalities, and in Burne he missed that immediate magnetism to which he usually swore allegiance. But that night Amory was struck by Burne’s intense earnestness, a quality he was accustomed to associate only with the dread stupidity, and by the great enthusiasm that struck dead chords in his heart. Burne stood vaguely for a land Amory hoped he was drifting toward—and it was almost time that land was in sight.	Burne's serious sincerity

struck dead chords in his heart.	With other men of whom he had thought as primarily first-class, he had been attracted first by their personalities, and in Burne he missed that immediate magnetism to which he usually swore allegiance. But that night Amory was struck by Burne’s intense earnestness, a quality he was accustomed to associate only with the dread stupidity, and by the great enthusiasm that struck dead chords in his heart. Burne stood vaguely for a land Amory hoped he was drifting toward—and it was almost time that land was in sight.	felt no emotional response.

time that land was in sight.	But that night Amory was struck by Burne’s intense earnestness, a quality he was accustomed to associate only with the dread stupidity, and by the great enthusiasm that struck dead chords in his heart. Burne stood vaguely for a land Amory hoped he was drifting toward—and it was almost time that land was in sight. Tom and Amory and Alec had reached an impasse; never did they seem to have new experiences in common, for Tom and Alec had been as blindly busy with their committees and boards as Amory had been blindly idling, and the things they had for dissection—college, contemporary personality and the like—they had hashed and rehashed for many a frugal conversational meal.	It was almost time to see that place.

many a frugal conversational meal	Burne stood vaguely for a land Amory hoped he was drifting toward—and it was almost time that land was in sight. Tom and Amory and Alec had reached an impasse; never did they seem to have new experiences in common, for Tom and Alec had been as blindly busy with their committees and boards as Amory had been blindly idling, and the things they had for dissection—college, contemporary personality and the like—they had hashed and rehashed for many a frugal conversational meal. That night they discussed the clubs until twelve, and, in the main, they agreed with Burne.	many a simple conversation

had for dissection—college, contemporary personality and the like—they had hashed and rehashed for many a frugal conversational meal.	Burne stood vaguely for a land Amory hoped he was drifting toward—and it was almost time that land was in sight. Tom and Amory and Alec had reached an impasse; never did they seem to have new experiences in common, for Tom and Alec had been as blindly busy with their committees and boards as Amory had been blindly idling, and the things they had for dissection—college, contemporary personality and the like—they had hashed and rehashed for many a frugal conversational meal. That night they discussed the clubs until twelve, and, in the main, they agreed with Burne.	they had discussed and analyzed those topics—college, current personalities, and similar things—over and over during many brief conversations.

discussed the clubs until twelve, and, in the main, they agreed with Burne.	Tom and Amory and Alec had reached an impasse; never did they seem to have new experiences in common, for Tom and Alec had been as blindly busy with their committees and boards as Amory had been blindly idling, and the things they had for dissection—college, contemporary personality and the like—they had hashed and rehashed for many a frugal conversational meal. That night they discussed the clubs until twelve, and, in the main, they agreed with Burne. To the roommates it did not seem such a vital subject as it had in the two years before, but the logic of Burne’s objections to the social system dovetailed so completely with everything they had thought, that they questioned rather than argued, and envied the sanity that enabled this man to stand out so against all traditions.	They talked about the clubs until midnight, and generally, they agreed with Burne.

in the two years before, but the logic of Burne’s objections to the social system dovetailed so completely with everything they had thought, that they questioned rather than argued, and envied the sanity that enabled this man to stand out so against all traditions.	That night they discussed the clubs until twelve, and, in the main, they agreed with Burne. To the roommates it did not seem such a vital subject as it had in the two years before, but the logic of Burne’s objections to the social system dovetailed so completely with everything they had thought, that they questioned rather than argued, and envied the sanity that enabled this man to stand out so against all traditions. Then Amory branched off and found that Burne was deep in other things as well.	in the two years before, but Burne's reasons for disliking the social system fit so well with their own thoughts that they asked questions instead of arguing, and they were jealous of how clearly he could go against all the traditions.

Burne’s objections	That night they discussed the clubs until twelve, and, in the main, they agreed with Burne. To the roommates it did not seem such a vital subject as it had in the two years before, but the logic of Burne’s objections to the social system dovetailed so completely with everything they had thought, that they questioned rather than argued, and envied the sanity that enabled this man to stand out so against all traditions. Then Amory branched off and found that Burne was deep in other things as well.	Burne's disagreements

was deep in other things as well.	To the roommates it did not seem such a vital subject as it had in the two years before, but the logic of Burne’s objections to the social system dovetailed so completely with everything they had thought, that they questioned rather than argued, and envied the sanity that enabled this man to stand out so against all traditions. Then Amory branched off and found that Burne was deep in other things as well. Economics had interested him and he was turning socialist.	He was also involved in other topics.

played in the back of his mind, and he read the Masses and Lyoff Tolstoy faithfully.	Economics had interested him and he was turning socialist. Pacifism played in the back of his mind, and he read the Masses and Lyoff Tolstoy faithfully. “How about religion?”	It was in his thoughts, and he regularly read The Masses and Leo Tolstoy.

’m in a muddle about a lot of things—I’ve just discovered that I’ve a mind, and I’m starting to read.”	“Don’t know. I’m in a muddle about a lot of things—I’ve just discovered that I’ve a mind, and I’m starting to read.” “Read what?”	I'm confused about a lot of things—I just realized I have a mind, and I'm starting to read.

man named Edward Carpenter.	“What chiefly started you?” “Wells, I guess, and Tolstoy, and a man named Edward Carpenter. I’ve been reading for over a year now—on a few lines, on what I consider the essential lines.”	A man named Edward Carpenter.

a definite ethical force	“Whitman?” “Yes; he’s a definite ethical force.” “Well, I’m ashamed to say that I’m a blank on the subject of Whitman.	a clear moral influence

subject of Whitman.	“Yes; he’s a definite ethical force.” “Well, I’m ashamed to say that I’m a blank on the subject of Whitman. How about you, Tom?”	Whitman's work.

tremendous—like Tolstoy.	“Well,” continued Burne, “you may strike a few poems that are tiresome, but I mean the mass of his work. He’s tremendous—like Tolstoy. They both look things in the face, and, somehow, different as they are, stand for somewhat the same things.”	Amazing, like Tolstoy.

stand for somewhat the same things.”	He’s tremendous—like Tolstoy. They both look things in the face, and, somehow, different as they are, stand for somewhat the same things.” “You have me stumped, Burne,” Amory admitted.	represent similar ideas.

the Kreutzer Sonata	“You have me stumped, Burne,” Amory admitted. “I’ve read Anna Karénina and the Kreutzer Sonata of course, but Tolstoy is mostly in the original Russian as far as I’m concerned.” “He’s the greatest man in hundreds of years,” cried Burne enthusiastically.	The Kreutzer Sonata

is mostly in the original Russian as far as I’m concerned.”	“You have me stumped, Burne,” Amory admitted. “I’ve read Anna Karénina and the Kreutzer Sonata of course, but Tolstoy is mostly in the original Russian as far as I’m concerned.” “He’s the greatest man in hundreds of years,” cried Burne enthusiastically.	I mostly read it in the original Russian.

man in hundreds of years,” cried Burne enthusiastically.	“I’ve read Anna Karénina and the Kreutzer Sonata of course, but Tolstoy is mostly in the original Russian as far as I’m concerned.” “He’s the greatest man in hundreds of years,” cried Burne enthusiastically. “Did you ever see a picture of that shaggy old head of his?”	greatest man in hundreds of years!" Burne said enthusiastically.

that shaggy old head	“He’s the greatest man in hundreds of years,” cried Burne enthusiastically. “Did you ever see a picture of that shaggy old head of his?” They talked until three, from biology to organized religion, and when Amory crept shivering into bed it was with his mind aglow with ideas and a sense of shock that someone else had discovered the path he might have followed.	That old, messy-haired head

aglow with ideas and a sense of shock that someone else had discovered the path he might have followed.	“Did you ever see a picture of that shaggy old head of his?” They talked until three, from biology to organized religion, and when Amory crept shivering into bed it was with his mind aglow with ideas and a sense of shock that someone else had discovered the path he might have followed. Burne Holiday was so evidently developing—and Amory had considered that he was doing the same.	excited by new ideas and shocked that someone else had found a direction he could have taken.

a deep cynicism	Burne Holiday was so evidently developing—and Amory had considered that he was doing the same. He had fallen into a deep cynicism over what had crossed his path, plotted the imperfectability of man and read Shaw and Chesterton enough to keep his mind from the edges of decadence—now suddenly all his mental processes of the last year and a half seemed stale and futile—a petty consummation of himself. and like a sombre background lay that incident of the spring before, that filled half his nights with a dreary terror and made him unable to pray.	a deep negativity

a petty consummation	Burne Holiday was so evidently developing—and Amory had considered that he was doing the same. He had fallen into a deep cynicism over what had crossed his path, plotted the imperfectability of man and read Shaw and Chesterton enough to keep his mind from the edges of decadence—now suddenly all his mental processes of the last year and a half seemed stale and futile—a petty consummation of himself. and like a sombre background lay that incident of the spring before, that filled half his nights with a dreary terror and made him unable to pray.	a small and insignificant achievement

cynicism over what had crossed his path, plotted the imperfectability of man and read Shaw and Chesterton enough to keep his mind from the edges of decadence—now suddenly all his mental processes of the last year and a half seemed stale and futile—a petty consummation of himself.	Burne Holiday was so evidently developing—and Amory had considered that he was doing the same. He had fallen into a deep cynicism over what had crossed his path, plotted the imperfectability of man and read Shaw and Chesterton enough to keep his mind from the edges of decadence—now suddenly all his mental processes of the last year and a half seemed stale and futile—a petty consummation of himself. and like a sombre background lay that incident of the spring before, that filled half his nights with a dreary terror and made him unable to pray.	He had become cynical about his experiences, decided that humans are flawed, and read Shaw and Chesterton to avoid becoming too decadent. Now, all his thinking from the past year and a half felt pointless and useless, a small and insignificant achievement.

a sombre background	He had fallen into a deep cynicism over what had crossed his path, plotted the imperfectability of man and read Shaw and Chesterton enough to keep his mind from the edges of decadence—now suddenly all his mental processes of the last year and a half seemed stale and futile—a petty consummation of himself. and like a sombre background lay that incident of the spring before, that filled half his nights with a dreary terror and made him unable to pray. He was not even a Catholic, yet that was the only ghost of a code that he had, the gaudy, ritualistic, paradoxical Catholicism whose prophet was Chesterton, whose claqueurs were such reformed rakes of literature as Huysmans and Bourget, whose American sponsor was Ralph Adams Cram, with his adulation of thirteenth-century cathedrals—a Catholicism which Amory found convenient and ready-made, without priest or sacraments or sacrifice.	A dark memory

a dreary terror	He had fallen into a deep cynicism over what had crossed his path, plotted the imperfectability of man and read Shaw and Chesterton enough to keep his mind from the edges of decadence—now suddenly all his mental processes of the last year and a half seemed stale and futile—a petty consummation of himself. and like a sombre background lay that incident of the spring before, that filled half his nights with a dreary terror and made him unable to pray. He was not even a Catholic, yet that was the only ghost of a code that he had, the gaudy, ritualistic, paradoxical Catholicism whose prophet was Chesterton, whose claqueurs were such reformed rakes of literature as Huysmans and Bourget, whose American sponsor was Ralph Adams Cram, with his adulation of thirteenth-century cathedrals—a Catholicism which Amory found convenient and ready-made, without priest or sacraments or sacrifice.	a depressing fear

lay that incident of the spring before, that filled half his nights with a dreary terror and made him unable to pray.	He had fallen into a deep cynicism over what had crossed his path, plotted the imperfectability of man and read Shaw and Chesterton enough to keep his mind from the edges of decadence—now suddenly all his mental processes of the last year and a half seemed stale and futile—a petty consummation of himself. and like a sombre background lay that incident of the spring before, that filled half his nights with a dreary terror and made him unable to pray. He was not even a Catholic, yet that was the only ghost of a code that he had, the gaudy, ritualistic, paradoxical Catholicism whose prophet was Chesterton, whose claqueurs were such reformed rakes of literature as Huysmans and Bourget, whose American sponsor was Ralph Adams Cram, with his adulation of thirteenth-century cathedrals—a Catholicism which Amory found convenient and ready-made, without priest or sacraments or sacrifice.	That incident from the previous spring was on his mind, it filled half his nights with a frightening terror and made him unable to pray.

such reformed rakes	and like a sombre background lay that incident of the spring before, that filled half his nights with a dreary terror and made him unable to pray. He was not even a Catholic, yet that was the only ghost of a code that he had, the gaudy, ritualistic, paradoxical Catholicism whose prophet was Chesterton, whose claqueurs were such reformed rakes of literature as Huysmans and Bourget, whose American sponsor was Ralph Adams Cram, with his adulation of thirteenth-century cathedrals—a Catholicism which Amory found convenient and ready-made, without priest or sacraments or sacrifice. He could not sleep, so he turned on his reading-lamp and, taking down the Kreutzer Sonata, searched it carefully for the germs of Burne’s enthusiasm.	such reformed rebels

thirteenth-century cathedrals	and like a sombre background lay that incident of the spring before, that filled half his nights with a dreary terror and made him unable to pray. He was not even a Catholic, yet that was the only ghost of a code that he had, the gaudy, ritualistic, paradoxical Catholicism whose prophet was Chesterton, whose claqueurs were such reformed rakes of literature as Huysmans and Bourget, whose American sponsor was Ralph Adams Cram, with his adulation of thirteenth-century cathedrals—a Catholicism which Amory found convenient and ready-made, without priest or sacraments or sacrifice. He could not sleep, so he turned on his reading-lamp and, taking down the Kreutzer Sonata, searched it carefully for the germs of Burne’s enthusiasm.	cathedrals from the 1200s

was Ralph Adams Cram, with his adulation of thirteenth-century cathedrals—a Catholicism which Amory found convenient and ready-made, without priest or sacraments or sacrifice.	and like a sombre background lay that incident of the spring before, that filled half his nights with a dreary terror and made him unable to pray. He was not even a Catholic, yet that was the only ghost of a code that he had, the gaudy, ritualistic, paradoxical Catholicism whose prophet was Chesterton, whose claqueurs were such reformed rakes of literature as Huysmans and Bourget, whose American sponsor was Ralph Adams Cram, with his adulation of thirteenth-century cathedrals—a Catholicism which Amory found convenient and ready-made, without priest or sacraments or sacrifice. He could not sleep, so he turned on his reading-lamp and, taking down the Kreutzer Sonata, searched it carefully for the germs of Burne’s enthusiasm.	was Ralph Adams Cram, who admired thirteenth-century cathedrals—a Catholicism that Amory found easy and ready to use, without needing a priest, sacraments, or sacrifice.

the gaudy, ritualistic, paradoxical Catholicism	and like a sombre background lay that incident of the spring before, that filled half his nights with a dreary terror and made him unable to pray. He was not even a Catholic, yet that was the only ghost of a code that he had, the gaudy, ritualistic, paradoxical Catholicism whose prophet was Chesterton, whose claqueurs were such reformed rakes of literature as Huysmans and Bourget, whose American sponsor was Ralph Adams Cram, with his adulation of thirteenth-century cathedrals—a Catholicism which Amory found convenient and ready-made, without priest or sacraments or sacrifice. He could not sleep, so he turned on his reading-lamp and, taking down the Kreutzer Sonata, searched it carefully for the germs of Burne’s enthusiasm.	The showy, rule-based, contradictory Catholicism

the Kreutzer Sonata	He was not even a Catholic, yet that was the only ghost of a code that he had, the gaudy, ritualistic, paradoxical Catholicism whose prophet was Chesterton, whose claqueurs were such reformed rakes of literature as Huysmans and Bourget, whose American sponsor was Ralph Adams Cram, with his adulation of thirteenth-century cathedrals—a Catholicism which Amory found convenient and ready-made, without priest or sacraments or sacrifice. He could not sleep, so he turned on his reading-lamp and, taking down the Kreutzer Sonata, searched it carefully for the germs of Burne’s enthusiasm. Being Burne was suddenly so much realler than being clever.	The Kreutzer Sonata

Burne’s enthusiasm	He was not even a Catholic, yet that was the only ghost of a code that he had, the gaudy, ritualistic, paradoxical Catholicism whose prophet was Chesterton, whose claqueurs were such reformed rakes of literature as Huysmans and Bourget, whose American sponsor was Ralph Adams Cram, with his adulation of thirteenth-century cathedrals—a Catholicism which Amory found convenient and ready-made, without priest or sacraments or sacrifice. He could not sleep, so he turned on his reading-lamp and, taking down the Kreutzer Sonata, searched it carefully for the germs of Burne’s enthusiasm. Being Burne was suddenly so much realler than being clever.	Burne's passion

searched it carefully for the germs of Burne’s enthusiasm.	He was not even a Catholic, yet that was the only ghost of a code that he had, the gaudy, ritualistic, paradoxical Catholicism whose prophet was Chesterton, whose claqueurs were such reformed rakes of literature as Huysmans and Bourget, whose American sponsor was Ralph Adams Cram, with his adulation of thirteenth-century cathedrals—a Catholicism which Amory found convenient and ready-made, without priest or sacraments or sacrifice. He could not sleep, so he turned on his reading-lamp and, taking down the Kreutzer Sonata, searched it carefully for the germs of Burne’s enthusiasm. Being Burne was suddenly so much realler than being clever.	carefully looked for what made Burne so enthusiastic.

realler than being clever.	He could not sleep, so he turned on his reading-lamp and, taking down the Kreutzer Sonata, searched it carefully for the germs of Burne’s enthusiasm. Being Burne was suddenly so much realler than being clever. Yet he sighed.	more real than being smart.

his brother’s personality	here were other possible clay feet. He thought back through two years, of Burne as a hurried, nervous freshman, quite submerged in his brother’s personality. Then he remembered an incident of sophomore year, in which Burne had been suspected of the leading role.	his brother's character

thought back through two years, of Burne as a hurried, nervous freshman, quite submerged in his brother’s personality.	here were other possible clay feet. He thought back through two years, of Burne as a hurried, nervous freshman, quite submerged in his brother’s personality. Then he remembered an incident of sophomore year, in which Burne had been suspected of the leading role.	He thought back over two years, remembering Burne as a hurried, nervous freshman, completely overshadowed by his brother.

a hurried, nervous freshman	here were other possible clay feet. He thought back through two years, of Burne as a hurried, nervous freshman, quite submerged in his brother’s personality. Then he remembered an incident of sophomore year, in which Burne had been suspected of the leading role.	A hurried, nervous freshman.

sophomore year	He thought back through two years, of Burne as a hurried, nervous freshman, quite submerged in his brother’s personality. Then he remembered an incident of sophomore year, in which Burne had been suspected of the leading role. Dean Hollister had been heard by a large group arguing with a taxi-driver, who had driven him from the junction.	Second year of college

incident of sophomore year, in which Burne had been suspected of the leading role.	He thought back through two years, of Burne as a hurried, nervous freshman, quite submerged in his brother’s personality. Then he remembered an incident of sophomore year, in which Burne had been suspected of the leading role. Dean Hollister had been heard by a large group arguing with a taxi-driver, who had driven him from the junction.	An incident from his second year, where Burne was suspected of being the main person involved.

driver, who had driven him from the junction.	Then he remembered an incident of sophomore year, in which Burne had been suspected of the leading role. Dean Hollister had been heard by a large group arguing with a taxi-driver, who had driven him from the junction. In the course of the altercation the dean remarked that he “might as well buy the taxicab.”	driver who had taken him from the intersection.

course of the altercation the dean remarked that he “might as well buy the taxicab.”	Dean Hollister had been heard by a large group arguing with a taxi-driver, who had driven him from the junction. In the course of the altercation the dean remarked that he “might as well buy the taxicab.” He paid and walked off, but next morning he entered his private office to find the taxicab itself in the space usually occupied by his desk, bearing a sign which read “Property of Dean Hollister.	During the argument, the dean said he "might as well buy the taxi."

sign which read “Property of Dean Hollister.	In the course of the altercation the dean remarked that he “might as well buy the taxicab.” He paid and walked off, but next morning he entered his private office to find the taxicab itself in the space usually occupied by his desk, bearing a sign which read “Property of Dean Hollister. Bought and Paid for.”.	The sign said, "Property of Dean Hollister."

took two expert mechanics half a day to dissemble it into its minutest parts and remove it, which only goes to prove the rare energy of sophomore humor under efficient leadership.	Bought and Paid for.”. It took two expert mechanics half a day to dissemble it into its minutest parts and remove it, which only goes to prove the rare energy of sophomore humor under efficient leadership. Then again, that very fall, Burne had caused a sensation.	It took two skilled mechanics half a day to take it apart completely and remove it, which shows how much energy sophomore humor can have when it's well-organized.

two expert mechanics	Bought and Paid for.”. It took two expert mechanics half a day to dissemble it into its minutest parts and remove it, which only goes to prove the rare energy of sophomore humor under efficient leadership. Then again, that very fall, Burne had caused a sensation.	Two skilled mechanics

sophomore humor	Bought and Paid for.”. It took two expert mechanics half a day to dissemble it into its minutest parts and remove it, which only goes to prove the rare energy of sophomore humor under efficient leadership. Then again, that very fall, Burne had caused a sensation.	Sophomore humor

an intercollegiate prom-trotter	Then again, that very fall, Burne had caused a sensation. A certain Phyllis Styles, an intercollegiate prom-trotter, had failed to get her yearly invitation to the Harvard–Princeton game. Jesse Ferrenby had brought her to a smaller game a few weeks before, and had pressed Burne into service—to the ruination of the latter’s misogyny.	a woman who goes to many college dances

Styles, an intercollegiate prom-trotter, had failed to get her yearly invitation to the Harvard–Princeton game.	Then again, that very fall, Burne had caused a sensation. A certain Phyllis Styles, an intercollegiate prom-trotter, had failed to get her yearly invitation to the Harvard–Princeton game. Jesse Ferrenby had brought her to a smaller game a few weeks before, and had pressed Burne into service—to the ruination of the latter’s misogyny.	Phyllis Styles, who went to a lot of college dances, didn't get her usual invitation to the Harvard–Princeton game.

A certain Phyllis Styles	Then again, that very fall, Burne had caused a sensation. A certain Phyllis Styles, an intercollegiate prom-trotter, had failed to get her yearly invitation to the Harvard–Princeton game. Jesse Ferrenby had brought her to a smaller game a few weeks before, and had pressed Burne into service—to the ruination of the latter’s misogyny.	A woman named Phyllis Styles

the latter’s misogyny	A certain Phyllis Styles, an intercollegiate prom-trotter, had failed to get her yearly invitation to the Harvard–Princeton game. Jesse Ferrenby had brought her to a smaller game a few weeks before, and had pressed Burne into service—to the ruination of the latter’s misogyny. “Are you coming to the Harvard game?”	Burne's dislike of women

ruination of the latter’s misogyny.	A certain Phyllis Styles, an intercollegiate prom-trotter, had failed to get her yearly invitation to the Harvard–Princeton game. Jesse Ferrenby had brought her to a smaller game a few weeks before, and had pressed Burne into service—to the ruination of the latter’s misogyny. “Are you coming to the Harvard game?”	the destruction of his hatred of women.

cried Phyllis quickly.	Burne had asked indiscreetly, merely to make conversation. “If you ask me,” cried Phyllis quickly. “Of course I do,” said Burne feebly.	Phyllis said quickly.

a vapid form	“Of course I do,” said Burne feebly. He was unversed in the arts of Phyllis, and was sure that this was merely a vapid form of kidding. Before an hour had passed he knew that he was indeed involved.	a silly joke

unversed in the arts of Phyllis, and was sure that this was merely a vapid form of kidding.	“Of course I do,” said Burne feebly. He was unversed in the arts of Phyllis, and was sure that this was merely a vapid form of kidding. Before an hour had passed he knew that he was indeed involved.	He didn't know how Phyllis worked, and he thought she was just making a silly joke.

train she was arriving by, and depressed him thoroughly.	Before an hour had passed he knew that he was indeed involved. Phyllis had pinned him down and served him up, informed him the train she was arriving by, and depressed him thoroughly. Aside from loathing Phyllis, he had particularly wanted to stag that game and entertain some Harvard friends.	the train she was taking, and made him very unhappy.

wanted to stag that game and entertain some Harvard friends.	Phyllis had pinned him down and served him up, informed him the train she was arriving by, and depressed him thoroughly. Aside from loathing Phyllis, he had particularly wanted to stag that game and entertain some Harvard friends. “She’ll see,” he informed a delegation who arrived in his room to josh him.	wanted to go to that game alone and have fun with some friends from Harvard.

delegation who arrived in his room to josh him.	Aside from loathing Phyllis, he had particularly wanted to stag that game and entertain some Harvard friends. “She’ll see,” he informed a delegation who arrived in his room to josh him. “This will be the last game she ever persuades any young innocent to take her to!”	group of people who came to his room to tease him.

game she ever persuades any young innocent to take her to!”	“She’ll see,” he informed a delegation who arrived in his room to josh him. “This will be the last game she ever persuades any young innocent to take her to!” “But, Burne—why did you invite her if you didn’t want her?”	game she ever convinces any young, inexperienced person to go with her to!

mad about her—that’s the real trouble.”	“But, Burne—why did you invite her if you didn’t want her?” “Burne, you know you’re secretly mad about her—that’s the real trouble.” “What can you do, Burne?	You're secretly crazy about her—that's the real problem.

, Burne	“Burne, you know you’re secretly mad about her—that’s the real trouble.” “What can you do, Burne? What can you do against Phyllis?”	Burne

do against Phyllis?”	“What can you do, Burne? What can you do against Phyllis?” But Burne only shook his head and muttered threats which consisted largely of the phrase: “She’ll see, she’ll see!”	do to Phyllis?

consisted largely of the phrase: “She’ll see, she’ll see!”	What can you do against Phyllis?” But Burne only shook his head and muttered threats which consisted largely of the phrase: “She’ll see, she’ll see!” The blithesome Phyllis bore her twenty-five summers gayly from the train, but on the platform a ghastly sight met her eyes.	mostly said: "She'll get what's coming to her!"

a ghastly sight	But Burne only shook his head and muttered threats which consisted largely of the phrase: “She’ll see, she’ll see!” The blithesome Phyllis bore her twenty-five summers gayly from the train, but on the platform a ghastly sight met her eyes. There were Burne and Fred Sloane arrayed to the last dot like the lurid figures on college posters.	A horrible sight

the lurid figures	The blithesome Phyllis bore her twenty-five summers gayly from the train, but on the platform a ghastly sight met her eyes. There were Burne and Fred Sloane arrayed to the last dot like the lurid figures on college posters. They had bought flaring suits with huge peg-top trousers and gigantic padded shoulders.	The garish figures

dot like the lurid figures on college posters.	The blithesome Phyllis bore her twenty-five summers gayly from the train, but on the platform a ghastly sight met her eyes. There were Burne and Fred Sloane arrayed to the last dot like the lurid figures on college posters. They had bought flaring suits with huge peg-top trousers and gigantic padded shoulders.	exactly like the scary figures on college posters

bought flaring suits with huge peg-top trousers and gigantic padded shoulders.	There were Burne and Fred Sloane arrayed to the last dot like the lurid figures on college posters. They had bought flaring suits with huge peg-top trousers and gigantic padded shoulders. On their heads were rakish college hats, pinned up in front and sporting bright orange-and-black bands, while from their celluloid collars blossomed flaming orange ties.	Bought bright suits with very wide trousers that narrowed at the ankles, and huge, padded shoulders.

flaring suits	There were Burne and Fred Sloane arrayed to the last dot like the lurid figures on college posters. They had bought flaring suits with huge peg-top trousers and gigantic padded shoulders. On their heads were rakish college hats, pinned up in front and sporting bright orange-and-black bands, while from their celluloid collars blossomed flaming orange ties.	Bright, eye-catching suits

huge peg-top trousers	There were Burne and Fred Sloane arrayed to the last dot like the lurid figures on college posters. They had bought flaring suits with huge peg-top trousers and gigantic padded shoulders. On their heads were rakish college hats, pinned up in front and sporting bright orange-and-black bands, while from their celluloid collars blossomed flaming orange ties.	Very wide trousers that were narrow at the ankles

gigantic padded shoulders	There were Burne and Fred Sloane arrayed to the last dot like the lurid figures on college posters. They had bought flaring suits with huge peg-top trousers and gigantic padded shoulders. On their heads were rakish college hats, pinned up in front and sporting bright orange-and-black bands, while from their celluloid collars blossomed flaming orange ties.	Huge, padded shoulders

blossomed flaming orange ties.	They had bought flaring suits with huge peg-top trousers and gigantic padded shoulders. On their heads were rakish college hats, pinned up in front and sporting bright orange-and-black bands, while from their celluloid collars blossomed flaming orange ties. They wore black armbands with orange “P’s,” and carried canes flying Princeton pennants, the effect completed by socks and peeping handkerchiefs in the same color motifs.	They wore bright orange ties.

their celluloid collars	They had bought flaring suits with huge peg-top trousers and gigantic padded shoulders. On their heads were rakish college hats, pinned up in front and sporting bright orange-and-black bands, while from their celluloid collars blossomed flaming orange ties. They wore black armbands with orange “P’s,” and carried canes flying Princeton pennants, the effect completed by socks and peeping handkerchiefs in the same color motifs.	their stiff, shiny collars

rakish college hats	They had bought flaring suits with huge peg-top trousers and gigantic padded shoulders. On their heads were rakish college hats, pinned up in front and sporting bright orange-and-black bands, while from their celluloid collars blossomed flaming orange ties. They wore black armbands with orange “P’s,” and carried canes flying Princeton pennants, the effect completed by socks and peeping handkerchiefs in the same color motifs.	Stylish college hats

Princeton pennants	On their heads were rakish college hats, pinned up in front and sporting bright orange-and-black bands, while from their celluloid collars blossomed flaming orange ties. They wore black armbands with orange “P’s,” and carried canes flying Princeton pennants, the effect completed by socks and peeping handkerchiefs in the same color motifs. On a clanking chain they led a large, angry tomcat, painted to represent a tiger.	Princeton pennants

peeping handkerchiefs in the same color motifs.	On their heads were rakish college hats, pinned up in front and sporting bright orange-and-black bands, while from their celluloid collars blossomed flaming orange ties. They wore black armbands with orange “P’s,” and carried canes flying Princeton pennants, the effect completed by socks and peeping handkerchiefs in the same color motifs. On a clanking chain they led a large, angry tomcat, painted to represent a tiger.	handkerchiefs that showed the same colors.

black armbands	On their heads were rakish college hats, pinned up in front and sporting bright orange-and-black bands, while from their celluloid collars blossomed flaming orange ties. They wore black armbands with orange “P’s,” and carried canes flying Princeton pennants, the effect completed by socks and peeping handkerchiefs in the same color motifs. On a clanking chain they led a large, angry tomcat, painted to represent a tiger.	black armbands

the same color motifs	On their heads were rakish college hats, pinned up in front and sporting bright orange-and-black bands, while from their celluloid collars blossomed flaming orange ties. They wore black armbands with orange “P’s,” and carried canes flying Princeton pennants, the effect completed by socks and peeping handkerchiefs in the same color motifs. On a clanking chain they led a large, angry tomcat, painted to represent a tiger.	the same colors

a clanking chain	They wore black armbands with orange “P’s,” and carried canes flying Princeton pennants, the effect completed by socks and peeping handkerchiefs in the same color motifs. On a clanking chain they led a large, angry tomcat, painted to represent a tiger. A good half of the station crowd was already staring at them, torn between horrified pity and riotous mirth, and as Phyllis, with her svelte jaw dropping, approached, the pair bent over and emitted a college cheer in loud, far-carrying voices, thoughtfully adding the name “Phyllis” to the end.	a noisy chain

led a large, angry tomcat, painted to represent a tiger.	They wore black armbands with orange “P’s,” and carried canes flying Princeton pennants, the effect completed by socks and peeping handkerchiefs in the same color motifs. On a clanking chain they led a large, angry tomcat, painted to represent a tiger. A good half of the station crowd was already staring at them, torn between horrified pity and riotous mirth, and as Phyllis, with her svelte jaw dropping, approached, the pair bent over and emitted a college cheer in loud, far-carrying voices, thoughtfully adding the name “Phyllis” to the end.	They led a big, angry cat that was painted to look like a tiger.

a large, angry tomcat	They wore black armbands with orange “P’s,” and carried canes flying Princeton pennants, the effect completed by socks and peeping handkerchiefs in the same color motifs. On a clanking chain they led a large, angry tomcat, painted to represent a tiger. A good half of the station crowd was already staring at them, torn between horrified pity and riotous mirth, and as Phyllis, with her svelte jaw dropping, approached, the pair bent over and emitted a college cheer in loud, far-carrying voices, thoughtfully adding the name “Phyllis” to the end.	a big, angry cat

a college cheer	On a clanking chain they led a large, angry tomcat, painted to represent a tiger. A good half of the station crowd was already staring at them, torn between horrified pity and riotous mirth, and as Phyllis, with her svelte jaw dropping, approached, the pair bent over and emitted a college cheer in loud, far-carrying voices, thoughtfully adding the name “Phyllis” to the end. She was vociferously greeted and escorted enthusiastically across the campus, followed by half a hundred village urchins—to the stifled laughter of hundreds of alumni and visitors, half of whom had no idea that this was a practical joke, but thought that Burne and Fred were two varsity sports showing their girl a collegiate time.	A cheer used at college.

riotous mirth	On a clanking chain they led a large, angry tomcat, painted to represent a tiger. A good half of the station crowd was already staring at them, torn between horrified pity and riotous mirth, and as Phyllis, with her svelte jaw dropping, approached, the pair bent over and emitted a college cheer in loud, far-carrying voices, thoughtfully adding the name “Phyllis” to the end. She was vociferously greeted and escorted enthusiastically across the campus, followed by half a hundred village urchins—to the stifled laughter of hundreds of alumni and visitors, half of whom had no idea that this was a practical joke, but thought that Burne and Fred were two varsity sports showing their girl a collegiate time.	Wild laughter

her svelte jaw dropping	On a clanking chain they led a large, angry tomcat, painted to represent a tiger. A good half of the station crowd was already staring at them, torn between horrified pity and riotous mirth, and as Phyllis, with her svelte jaw dropping, approached, the pair bent over and emitted a college cheer in loud, far-carrying voices, thoughtfully adding the name “Phyllis” to the end. She was vociferously greeted and escorted enthusiastically across the campus, followed by half a hundred village urchins—to the stifled laughter of hundreds of alumni and visitors, half of whom had no idea that this was a practical joke, but thought that Burne and Fred were two varsity sports showing their girl a collegiate time.	Her elegant jaw fell open in surprise.

name “Phyllis” to the end.	On a clanking chain they led a large, angry tomcat, painted to represent a tiger. A good half of the station crowd was already staring at them, torn between horrified pity and riotous mirth, and as Phyllis, with her svelte jaw dropping, approached, the pair bent over and emitted a college cheer in loud, far-carrying voices, thoughtfully adding the name “Phyllis” to the end. She was vociferously greeted and escorted enthusiastically across the campus, followed by half a hundred village urchins—to the stifled laughter of hundreds of alumni and visitors, half of whom had no idea that this was a practical joke, but thought that Burne and Fred were two varsity sports showing their girl a collegiate time.	They added the name "Phyllis" at the end.

horrified pity	On a clanking chain they led a large, angry tomcat, painted to represent a tiger. A good half of the station crowd was already staring at them, torn between horrified pity and riotous mirth, and as Phyllis, with her svelte jaw dropping, approached, the pair bent over and emitted a college cheer in loud, far-carrying voices, thoughtfully adding the name “Phyllis” to the end. She was vociferously greeted and escorted enthusiastically across the campus, followed by half a hundred village urchins—to the stifled laughter of hundreds of alumni and visitors, half of whom had no idea that this was a practical joke, but thought that Burne and Fred were two varsity sports showing their girl a collegiate time.	Horrified pity

two varsity sports	A good half of the station crowd was already staring at them, torn between horrified pity and riotous mirth, and as Phyllis, with her svelte jaw dropping, approached, the pair bent over and emitted a college cheer in loud, far-carrying voices, thoughtfully adding the name “Phyllis” to the end. She was vociferously greeted and escorted enthusiastically across the campus, followed by half a hundred village urchins—to the stifled laughter of hundreds of alumni and visitors, half of whom had no idea that this was a practical joke, but thought that Burne and Fred were two varsity sports showing their girl a collegiate time. Phyllis’s feelings as she was paraded by the Harvard and Princeton stands, where sat dozens of her former devotees, can be imagined.	two college athletes

the stifled laughter	A good half of the station crowd was already staring at them, torn between horrified pity and riotous mirth, and as Phyllis, with her svelte jaw dropping, approached, the pair bent over and emitted a college cheer in loud, far-carrying voices, thoughtfully adding the name “Phyllis” to the end. She was vociferously greeted and escorted enthusiastically across the campus, followed by half a hundred village urchins—to the stifled laughter of hundreds of alumni and visitors, half of whom had no idea that this was a practical joke, but thought that Burne and Fred were two varsity sports showing their girl a collegiate time. Phyllis’s feelings as she was paraded by the Harvard and Princeton stands, where sat dozens of her former devotees, can be imagined.	The suppressed laughter

half a hundred village urchins	A good half of the station crowd was already staring at them, torn between horrified pity and riotous mirth, and as Phyllis, with her svelte jaw dropping, approached, the pair bent over and emitted a college cheer in loud, far-carrying voices, thoughtfully adding the name “Phyllis” to the end. She was vociferously greeted and escorted enthusiastically across the campus, followed by half a hundred village urchins—to the stifled laughter of hundreds of alumni and visitors, half of whom had no idea that this was a practical joke, but thought that Burne and Fred were two varsity sports showing their girl a collegiate time. Phyllis’s feelings as she was paraded by the Harvard and Princeton stands, where sat dozens of her former devotees, can be imagined.	about fifty children from the village

idea that this was a practical joke, but thought that Burne and Fred were two varsity sports showing their girl a collegiate time.	A good half of the station crowd was already staring at them, torn between horrified pity and riotous mirth, and as Phyllis, with her svelte jaw dropping, approached, the pair bent over and emitted a college cheer in loud, far-carrying voices, thoughtfully adding the name “Phyllis” to the end. She was vociferously greeted and escorted enthusiastically across the campus, followed by half a hundred village urchins—to the stifled laughter of hundreds of alumni and visitors, half of whom had no idea that this was a practical joke, but thought that Burne and Fred were two varsity sports showing their girl a collegiate time. Phyllis’s feelings as she was paraded by the Harvard and Princeton stands, where sat dozens of her former devotees, can be imagined.	idea that this was a prank, but thought that Burne and Fred were two athletes showing their girl a good time at college.

dozens of her former devotees, can be imagined.	She was vociferously greeted and escorted enthusiastically across the campus, followed by half a hundred village urchins—to the stifled laughter of hundreds of alumni and visitors, half of whom had no idea that this was a practical joke, but thought that Burne and Fred were two varsity sports showing their girl a collegiate time. Phyllis’s feelings as she was paraded by the Harvard and Princeton stands, where sat dozens of her former devotees, can be imagined. She tried to walk a little ahead, she tried to walk a little behind—but they stayed close, that there should be no doubt whom she was with, talking in loud voices of their friends on the football team, until she could almost hear her acquaintances whispering: “Phyllis Styles must be awfully hard up to have to come with those two.”	You can imagine how she felt, seeing dozens of the people who used to admire her.

Phyllis’s feelings	She was vociferously greeted and escorted enthusiastically across the campus, followed by half a hundred village urchins—to the stifled laughter of hundreds of alumni and visitors, half of whom had no idea that this was a practical joke, but thought that Burne and Fred were two varsity sports showing their girl a collegiate time. Phyllis’s feelings as she was paraded by the Harvard and Princeton stands, where sat dozens of her former devotees, can be imagined. She tried to walk a little ahead, she tried to walk a little behind—but they stayed close, that there should be no doubt whom she was with, talking in loud voices of their friends on the football team, until she could almost hear her acquaintances whispering: “Phyllis Styles must be awfully hard up to have to come with those two.”	How Phyllis felt

her former devotees	She was vociferously greeted and escorted enthusiastically across the campus, followed by half a hundred village urchins—to the stifled laughter of hundreds of alumni and visitors, half of whom had no idea that this was a practical joke, but thought that Burne and Fred were two varsity sports showing their girl a collegiate time. Phyllis’s feelings as she was paraded by the Harvard and Princeton stands, where sat dozens of her former devotees, can be imagined. She tried to walk a little ahead, she tried to walk a little behind—but they stayed close, that there should be no doubt whom she was with, talking in loud voices of their friends on the football team, until she could almost hear her acquaintances whispering: “Phyllis Styles must be awfully hard up to have to come with those two.”	her former admirers

talking in loud voices of their friends on the football team, until she could almost hear her acquaintances whispering: “Phyllis Styles must be awfully hard up to have to come with those two.”	Phyllis’s feelings as she was paraded by the Harvard and Princeton stands, where sat dozens of her former devotees, can be imagined. She tried to walk a little ahead, she tried to walk a little behind—but they stayed close, that there should be no doubt whom she was with, talking in loud voices of their friends on the football team, until she could almost hear her acquaintances whispering: “Phyllis Styles must be awfully hard up to have to come with those two.” That had been Burne, dynamically humorous, fundamentally serious.	They were talking loudly about their friends on the football team until she could almost hear her acquaintances whispering: "Phyllis Styles must be really desperate to be hanging out with those two."

energy that he was now trying to orient with progress.	That had been Burne, dynamically humorous, fundamentally serious. From that root had blossomed the energy that he was now trying to orient with progress. So the weeks passed and March came and the clay feet that Amory looked for failed to appear.	the energy he was now trying to direct toward advancement.

looked for failed to appear.	From that root had blossomed the energy that he was now trying to orient with progress. So the weeks passed and March came and the clay feet that Amory looked for failed to appear. About a hundred juniors and seniors resigned from their clubs in a final fury of righteousness, and the clubs in helplessness turned upon Burne their finest weapon: ridicule.	didn't show up.

fury of righteousness, and the clubs in helplessness turned upon Burne their finest weapon: ridicule.	So the weeks passed and March came and the clay feet that Amory looked for failed to appear. About a hundred juniors and seniors resigned from their clubs in a final fury of righteousness, and the clubs in helplessness turned upon Burne their finest weapon: ridicule. Everyone who knew him liked him—but what he stood for (and he began to stand for more all the time) came under the lash of many tongues, until a frailer man than he would have been snowed under.	They were righteously angry, and the clubs, feeling helpless, used ridicule as their best weapon against Burne.

a final fury	So the weeks passed and March came and the clay feet that Amory looked for failed to appear. About a hundred juniors and seniors resigned from their clubs in a final fury of righteousness, and the clubs in helplessness turned upon Burne their finest weapon: ridicule. Everyone who knew him liked him—but what he stood for (and he began to stand for more all the time) came under the lash of many tongues, until a frailer man than he would have been snowed under.	a last burst of anger

stood for (and he began to stand for more all the time) came under the lash of many tongues, until a frailer man than he would have been snowed under.	About a hundred juniors and seniors resigned from their clubs in a final fury of righteousness, and the clubs in helplessness turned upon Burne their finest weapon: ridicule. Everyone who knew him liked him—but what he stood for (and he began to stand for more all the time) came under the lash of many tongues, until a frailer man than he would have been snowed under. “Don’t you mind losing prestige?” asked Amory one night.	What he believed in (and he started to believe in more things all the time) was strongly criticized, until someone weaker than him would have been overwhelmed.

a frailer man	About a hundred juniors and seniors resigned from their clubs in a final fury of righteousness, and the clubs in helplessness turned upon Burne their finest weapon: ridicule. Everyone who knew him liked him—but what he stood for (and he began to stand for more all the time) came under the lash of many tongues, until a frailer man than he would have been snowed under. “Don’t you mind losing prestige?” asked Amory one night.	A weaker man

taken to exchanging calls several times a week.	“Don’t you mind losing prestige?” asked Amory one night. They had taken to exchanging calls several times a week. “Of course I don’t.	They had started calling each other a few times a week.

just a rather original politician	What’s prestige, at best?” “Some people say that you’re just a rather original politician.” He roared with laughter.	Just a pretty unique politician.

roared with laughter.	“Some people say that you’re just a rather original politician.” He roared with laughter. “That’s what Fred Sloane told me today.	laughed loudly.

a man’s makeup	I suppose I have it coming.” One afternoon they dipped into a subject that had interested Amory for a long time—the matter of the bearing of physical attributes on a man’s makeup. Burne had gone into the biology of this, and then: “Of course health counts—a healthy man has twice the chance of being good,” he said.	a man's personality

they dipped into a subject that had interested Amory for a long time—the matter of the bearing of physical attributes on a man’s makeup.	I suppose I have it coming.” One afternoon they dipped into a subject that had interested Amory for a long time—the matter of the bearing of physical attributes on a man’s makeup. Burne had gone into the biology of this, and then: “Of course health counts—a healthy man has twice the chance of being good,” he said.	They discussed something Amory had been curious about for a while: how physical traits affect a person's character.

interested Amory	I suppose I have it coming.” One afternoon they dipped into a subject that had interested Amory for a long time—the matter of the bearing of physical attributes on a man’s makeup. Burne had gone into the biology of this, and then: “Of course health counts—a healthy man has twice the chance of being good,” he said.	Amory was interested

biology of this, and then: “Of course health counts—a healthy man has twice the chance of being good,” he said.	One afternoon they dipped into a subject that had interested Amory for a long time—the matter of the bearing of physical attributes on a man’s makeup. Burne had gone into the biology of this, and then: “Of course health counts—a healthy man has twice the chance of being good,” he said. “I don’t agree with you—I don’t believe in ‘muscular Christianity.’ ” “I do—I believe Christ had great physical vigor.”	They discussed the biology of this, and then he said, "Of course, health matters—a healthy man is much more likely to be good."

believe in ‘muscular Christianity.’ ” “I do—I believe Christ had great physical vigor.”	Burne had gone into the biology of this, and then: “Of course health counts—a healthy man has twice the chance of being good,” he said. “I don’t agree with you—I don’t believe in ‘muscular Christianity.’ ” “I do—I believe Christ had great physical vigor.” “Oh, no,” Amory protested.	I believe in "muscular Christianity." "I do – I believe Christ was very physically strong."

muscular Christianity	Burne had gone into the biology of this, and then: “Of course health counts—a healthy man has twice the chance of being good,” he said. “I don’t agree with you—I don’t believe in ‘muscular Christianity.’ ” “I do—I believe Christ had great physical vigor.” “Oh, no,” Amory protested.	The belief that physical health and strength are essential to Christian faith.

great physical vigor	Burne had gone into the biology of this, and then: “Of course health counts—a healthy man has twice the chance of being good,” he said. “I don’t agree with you—I don’t believe in ‘muscular Christianity.’ ” “I do—I believe Christ had great physical vigor.” “Oh, no,” Amory protested.	Very strong and healthy.

simulated virility	“Half of them have.” “Well, even granting that, I don’t think health has anything to do with goodness; of course, it’s valuable to a great saint to be able to stand enormous strains, but this fad of popular preachers rising on their toes in simulated virility, bellowing that calisthenics will save the world—no, Burne, I can’t go that.” “Well, let’s waive it—we won’t get anywhere, and besides I haven’t quite made up my mind about it myself.	fake manliness

fad of popular preachers rising on their toes in simulated virility, bellowing that calisthenics will save the world—no, Burne, I can’t go that.”	“Half of them have.” “Well, even granting that, I don’t think health has anything to do with goodness; of course, it’s valuable to a great saint to be able to stand enormous strains, but this fad of popular preachers rising on their toes in simulated virility, bellowing that calisthenics will save the world—no, Burne, I can’t go that.” “Well, let’s waive it—we won’t get anywhere, and besides I haven’t quite made up my mind about it myself.	The trend of popular preachers standing on their toes, pretending to be strong, and shouting that exercise will save the world – no, Burne, I don’t agree with that.

popular preachers	“Half of them have.” “Well, even granting that, I don’t think health has anything to do with goodness; of course, it’s valuable to a great saint to be able to stand enormous strains, but this fad of popular preachers rising on their toes in simulated virility, bellowing that calisthenics will save the world—no, Burne, I can’t go that.” “Well, let’s waive it—we won’t get anywhere, and besides I haven’t quite made up my mind about it myself.	Popular preachers

something I do know—personal appearance has a lot to do with it.”	“Well, let’s waive it—we won’t get anywhere, and besides I haven’t quite made up my mind about it myself. Now, here’s something I do know—personal appearance has a lot to do with it.” “Coloring?”	Something I know is that how you look matters a lot.

pictures of the senior council.	“That’s what Tom and I figured,” Amory agreed. “We took the yearbooks for the last ten years and looked at the pictures of the senior council. I know you don’t think much of that august body, but it does represent success here in a general way.	Pictures of the student leaders.

much of that august body, but it does represent success here in a general way.	“We took the yearbooks for the last ten years and looked at the pictures of the senior council. I know you don’t think much of that august body, but it does represent success here in a general way. Well, I suppose only about thirty-five percent of every class here are blonds, are really light—yet two-thirds of every senior council are light.	much of that important group, but it generally shows success here.

percent of every class here are blonds, are really light—yet two-thirds of every senior council are light.	I know you don’t think much of that august body, but it does represent success here in a general way. Well, I suppose only about thirty-five percent of every class here are blonds, are really light—yet two-thirds of every senior council are light. We looked at pictures of ten years of them, mind you; that means that out of every fifteen light-haired men in the senior class one is on the senior council, and of the dark-haired men it’s only one in fifty.”	A certain percentage of each class here has blond or light hair, but two-thirds of every senior council is light-haired.

every fifteen light-haired men	Well, I suppose only about thirty-five percent of every class here are blonds, are really light—yet two-thirds of every senior council are light. We looked at pictures of ten years of them, mind you; that means that out of every fifteen light-haired men in the senior class one is on the senior council, and of the dark-haired men it’s only one in fifty.” “It’s true,” Burne agreed.	Out of every fifteen light-haired men

is on the senior council, and of the dark-haired men it’s only one in fifty.”	Well, I suppose only about thirty-five percent of every class here are blonds, are really light—yet two-thirds of every senior council are light. We looked at pictures of ten years of them, mind you; that means that out of every fifteen light-haired men in the senior class one is on the senior council, and of the dark-haired men it’s only one in fifty.” “It’s true,” Burne agreed.	is on the senior council, and among the dark-haired men, it's only one out of fifty.

the dark-haired men	Well, I suppose only about thirty-five percent of every class here are blonds, are really light—yet two-thirds of every senior council are light. We looked at pictures of ten years of them, mind you; that means that out of every fifteen light-haired men in the senior class one is on the senior council, and of the dark-haired men it’s only one in fifty.” “It’s true,” Burne agreed.	the men with dark hair

The light-haired man	“It’s true,” Burne agreed. “The light-haired man is a higher type, generally speaking. I worked the thing out with the Presidents of the United States once, and found that way over half of them were light-haired—yet think of the preponderant number of brunettes in the race.”	Blond people

the preponderant number	“The light-haired man is a higher type, generally speaking. I worked the thing out with the Presidents of the United States once, and found that way over half of them were light-haired—yet think of the preponderant number of brunettes in the race.” “People unconsciously admit it,” said Amory.	the larger number

Presidents of the United States once, and found that way over half of them were light-haired—yet think of the preponderant number of brunettes in the race.”	“The light-haired man is a higher type, generally speaking. I worked the thing out with the Presidents of the United States once, and found that way over half of them were light-haired—yet think of the preponderant number of brunettes in the race.” “People unconsciously admit it,” said Amory.	I checked with the Presidents of the United States once, and found that more than half of them were light-haired, even though there are many more brunettes in the population.

a light-haired man	“You’ll notice a blond person is expected to talk. If a blond girl doesn’t talk we call her a ‘doll’; if a light-haired man is silent he’s considered stupid. Yet the world is full of ‘dark silent men’ and ‘languorous brunettes’ who haven’t a brain in their heads, but somehow are never accused of the dearth.”	A blond man

‘languorous brunettes	If a blond girl doesn’t talk we call her a ‘doll’; if a light-haired man is silent he’s considered stupid. Yet the world is full of ‘dark silent men’ and ‘languorous brunettes’ who haven’t a brain in their heads, but somehow are never accused of the dearth.” “And the large mouth and broad chin and rather big nose undoubtedly make the superior face.”	Lazy brunettes

accused of the dearth.”	If a blond girl doesn’t talk we call her a ‘doll’; if a light-haired man is silent he’s considered stupid. Yet the world is full of ‘dark silent men’ and ‘languorous brunettes’ who haven’t a brain in their heads, but somehow are never accused of the dearth.” “And the large mouth and broad chin and rather big nose undoubtedly make the superior face.”	accused of being unintelligent.

broad chin	Yet the world is full of ‘dark silent men’ and ‘languorous brunettes’ who haven’t a brain in their heads, but somehow are never accused of the dearth.” “And the large mouth and broad chin and rather big nose undoubtedly make the superior face.” “I’m not so sure.”	Wide chin

was all for classical features.	“I’m not so sure.” Amory was all for classical features. “Oh, yes—I’ll show you,” and Burne pulled out of his desk a photographic collection of heavily bearded, shaggy celebrities—Tolstoy, Whitman, Carpenter, and others.	liked classical features.

heavily bearded, shaggy celebrities	Amory was all for classical features. “Oh, yes—I’ll show you,” and Burne pulled out of his desk a photographic collection of heavily bearded, shaggy celebrities—Tolstoy, Whitman, Carpenter, and others. “Aren’t they wonderful?”	Celebrities with long, messy beards

collection of heavily bearded, shaggy celebrities—Tolstoy, Whitman, Carpenter, and others.	Amory was all for classical features. “Oh, yes—I’ll show you,” and Burne pulled out of his desk a photographic collection of heavily bearded, shaggy celebrities—Tolstoy, Whitman, Carpenter, and others. “Aren’t they wonderful?”	a collection of famous people with long, thick beards and messy hair—Tolstoy, Whitman, Carpenter, and others.

the ugliest-looking crowd	Amory tried politely to appreciate them, and gave up laughingly. “Burne, I think they’re the ugliest-looking crowd I ever came across. They look like an old man’s home.”	the ugliest people

look like an old man’s home.”	“Burne, I think they’re the ugliest-looking crowd I ever came across. They look like an old man’s home.” “Oh, Amory, look at that forehead on Emerson; look at Tolstoy’s eyes.”	They look like a nursing home.

an old man’s home	“Burne, I think they’re the ugliest-looking crowd I ever came across. They look like an old man’s home.” “Oh, Amory, look at that forehead on Emerson; look at Tolstoy’s eyes.”	A nursing home.

look at Tolstoy’s eyes.”	They look like an old man’s home.” “Oh, Amory, look at that forehead on Emerson; look at Tolstoy’s eyes.” His tone was reproachful.	Look at Tolstoy's eyes.

Tolstoy’s eyes	They look like an old man’s home.” “Oh, Amory, look at that forehead on Emerson; look at Tolstoy’s eyes.” His tone was reproachful.	Tolstoy's eyes

anything you want—but ugly they certainly are.”	Amory shook his head. “No! Call them remarkable-looking or anything you want—but ugly they certainly are.” Unabashed, Burne ran his hand lovingly across the spacious foreheads, and piling up the pictures put them back in his desk.	Call them anything you want, but they're definitely not ugly.

the spacious foreheads	“No! Call them remarkable-looking or anything you want—but ugly they certainly are.” Unabashed, Burne ran his hand lovingly across the spacious foreheads, and piling up the pictures put them back in his desk. Walking at night was one of his favorite pursuits, and one night he persuaded Amory to accompany him.	the big foreheads

ran his hand lovingly across the spacious foreheads, and piling up the pictures put them back in his desk.	“No! Call them remarkable-looking or anything you want—but ugly they certainly are.” Unabashed, Burne ran his hand lovingly across the spacious foreheads, and piling up the pictures put them back in his desk. Walking at night was one of his favorite pursuits, and one night he persuaded Amory to accompany him.	He lovingly touched their large foreheads and put the pictures back in his desk, after stacking them.

one of his favorite pursuits, and one night he persuaded Amory to accompany him.	Unabashed, Burne ran his hand lovingly across the spacious foreheads, and piling up the pictures put them back in his desk. Walking at night was one of his favorite pursuits, and one night he persuaded Amory to accompany him. “I hate the dark,” Amory objected.	It was one of his favorite things to do, and one night he convinced Amory to go with him.

sound very appealing to me,” admitted Amory reluctantly, “but let’s go.”	“We’ll go east,” Burne suggested, “and down that string of roads through the woods.” “Doesn’t sound very appealing to me,” admitted Amory reluctantly, “but let’s go.” They set off at a good gait, and for an hour swung along in a brisk argument until the lights of Princeton were luminous white blots behind them.	Doesn't sound very appealing to me, but let's go.

luminous white blots	“Doesn’t sound very appealing to me,” admitted Amory reluctantly, “but let’s go.” They set off at a good gait, and for an hour swung along in a brisk argument until the lights of Princeton were luminous white blots behind them. “Any person with any imagination is bound to be afraid,” said Burne earnestly.	Bright white spots

a brisk argument	“Doesn’t sound very appealing to me,” admitted Amory reluctantly, “but let’s go.” They set off at a good gait, and for an hour swung along in a brisk argument until the lights of Princeton were luminous white blots behind them. “Any person with any imagination is bound to be afraid,” said Burne earnestly.	a lively discussion

a good gait	“Doesn’t sound very appealing to me,” admitted Amory reluctantly, “but let’s go.” They set off at a good gait, and for an hour swung along in a brisk argument until the lights of Princeton were luminous white blots behind them. “Any person with any imagination is bound to be afraid,” said Burne earnestly.	walking at a good pace

set off at a good gait, and for an hour swung along in a brisk argument until the lights of Princeton were luminous white blots behind them.	“Doesn’t sound very appealing to me,” admitted Amory reluctantly, “but let’s go.” They set off at a good gait, and for an hour swung along in a brisk argument until the lights of Princeton were luminous white blots behind them. “Any person with any imagination is bound to be afraid,” said Burne earnestly.	They started walking at a good pace and argued energetically for an hour until the bright white lights of Princeton were far behind them.

person with any imagination is bound to be afraid,” said Burne earnestly.	They set off at a good gait, and for an hour swung along in a brisk argument until the lights of Princeton were luminous white blots behind them. “Any person with any imagination is bound to be afraid,” said Burne earnestly. “And this very walking at night is one of the things I was afraid about.	Anyone with imagination is definitely going to be afraid," Burne said seriously.

one of the things I was afraid about.	“Any person with any imagination is bound to be afraid,” said Burne earnestly. “And this very walking at night is one of the things I was afraid about. I’m going to tell you why I can walk anywhere now and not be afraid.”	One of the things I was scared of.

urged eagerly.	I’m going to tell you why I can walk anywhere now and not be afraid.” “Go on,” Amory urged eagerly. They were striding toward the woods, Burne’s nervous, enthusiastic voice warming to his subject.	urged excitedly.

stopped at that crossroad we just passed.	They were striding toward the woods, Burne’s nervous, enthusiastic voice warming to his subject. “I used to come out here alone at night, oh, three months ago, and I always stopped at that crossroad we just passed. There were the woods looming up ahead, just as they do now, there were dogs howling and the shadows and no human sound.	stopped at the crossroads we just went by.

dogs howling and the shadows and no human sound.	“I used to come out here alone at night, oh, three months ago, and I always stopped at that crossroad we just passed. There were the woods looming up ahead, just as they do now, there were dogs howling and the shadows and no human sound. Of course, I peopled the woods with everything ghastly, just like you do; don’t you?”	Dogs howling, shadows, and no people around.

peopled the woods with everything ghastly, just like you do; don’t you?”	There were the woods looming up ahead, just as they do now, there were dogs howling and the shadows and no human sound. Of course, I peopled the woods with everything ghastly, just like you do; don’t you?” “I do,” Amory admitted.	filled the woods with scary things, just like you do; don't you?

stray dog	“I do,” Amory admitted. “Well, I began analyzing it—my imagination persisted in sticking horrors into the dark—so I stuck my imagination into the dark instead, and let it look out at me—I let it play stray dog or escaped convict or ghost, and then saw myself coming along the road. That made it all right—as it always makes everything all right to project yourself completely into another’s place.	A lost dog

makes everything all right to project yourself completely into another’s place.	“Well, I began analyzing it—my imagination persisted in sticking horrors into the dark—so I stuck my imagination into the dark instead, and let it look out at me—I let it play stray dog or escaped convict or ghost, and then saw myself coming along the road. That made it all right—as it always makes everything all right to project yourself completely into another’s place. I knew that if I were the dog or the convict or the ghost I wouldn’t be a menace to Burne Holiday any more than he was a menace to me.	It always makes everything okay to fully imagine yourself in someone else's situation.

another’s place	“Well, I began analyzing it—my imagination persisted in sticking horrors into the dark—so I stuck my imagination into the dark instead, and let it look out at me—I let it play stray dog or escaped convict or ghost, and then saw myself coming along the road. That made it all right—as it always makes everything all right to project yourself completely into another’s place. I knew that if I were the dog or the convict or the ghost I wouldn’t be a menace to Burne Holiday any more than he was a menace to me.	someone else's perspective

was a menace to me.	That made it all right—as it always makes everything all right to project yourself completely into another’s place. I knew that if I were the dog or the convict or the ghost I wouldn’t be a menace to Burne Holiday any more than he was a menace to me. Then I thought of my watch.	didn't threaten me.

time an automobile passed and made the dark thicker when its lamps disappeared, I’d have come in.”	“I couldn’t have done that. I’d have come out halfway, and the first time an automobile passed and made the dark thicker when its lamps disappeared, I’d have come in.” “Well,” Burne said suddenly, after a few moments’ silence, “we’re halfway through, let’s turn back.”	When a car went by and made the darkness even darker as its headlights vanished, I would have gone back inside.

’re halfway through, let’s turn back.”	I’d have come out halfway, and the first time an automobile passed and made the dark thicker when its lamps disappeared, I’d have come in.” “Well,” Burne said suddenly, after a few moments’ silence, “we’re halfway through, let’s turn back.” On the return he launched into a discussion of will.	We're halfway, let's go back."

return he launched into a discussion of will.	“Well,” Burne said suddenly, after a few moments’ silence, “we’re halfway through, let’s turn back.” On the return he launched into a discussion of will. “It’s the whole thing,” he asserted.	On the way back, he started talking about willpower.

one dividing line between good and evil.	“It’s the whole thing,” he asserted. “It’s the one dividing line between good and evil. I’ve never met a man who led a rotten life and didn’t have a weak will.”	The one thing that separates good and evil.

a rotten life	“It’s the one dividing line between good and evil. I’ve never met a man who led a rotten life and didn’t have a weak will.” “How about great criminals?” “They’re usually insane.	A bad life

man who led a rotten life and didn’t have a weak will.”	“It’s the one dividing line between good and evil. I’ve never met a man who led a rotten life and didn’t have a weak will.” “How about great criminals?” “They’re usually insane.	A man who lived a bad life and didn't lack self-control.

’re usually insane.	I’ve never met a man who led a rotten life and didn’t have a weak will.” “How about great criminals?” “They’re usually insane. If not, they’re weak.	They're usually insane.

not, they’re weak.	“How about great criminals?” “They’re usually insane. If not, they’re weak. There is no such thing as a strong, sane criminal.”	If not, they are weak.

thing as a strong, sane criminal.”	If not, they’re weak. There is no such thing as a strong, sane criminal.” “Burne, I disagree with you altogether; how about the superman?”	thing as a strong, sane criminal.

a strong, sane criminal	If not, they’re weak. There is no such thing as a strong, sane criminal.” “Burne, I disagree with you altogether; how about the superman?”	A strong, sane criminal.

disagree with you altogether; how about the superman?”	There is no such thing as a strong, sane criminal.” “Burne, I disagree with you altogether; how about the superman?” “Well?” “He’s evil, I think, yet he’s strong and sane.”	I completely disagree with you. What about a superman?

believe in imprisonment except for the insane.”	That’s why I think you’re wrong.” “I’m sure I’m not—and so I don’t believe in imprisonment except for the insane.” On this point Amory could not agree.	believe in putting people in prison unless they are insane."

often self-deluding	On this point Amory could not agree. It seemed to him that life and history were rife with the strong criminal, keen, but often self-deluding; in politics and business one found him and among the old statesmen and kings and generals; but Burne never agreed and their courses began to split on that point. Burne was drawing farther and farther away from the world about him.	often deluding themselves

seemed to him that life and history were rife with the strong criminal, keen, but often self-deluding; in politics and business one found him and among the old statesmen and kings and generals; but Burne never agreed and their courses began to split on that point.	On this point Amory could not agree. It seemed to him that life and history were rife with the strong criminal, keen, but often self-deluding; in politics and business one found him and among the old statesmen and kings and generals; but Burne never agreed and their courses began to split on that point. Burne was drawing farther and farther away from the world about him.	Amory thought life and history were full of strong, clever criminals who often tricked themselves. He saw them in politics, business, among old leaders, kings, and generals. But Burne never agreed, and they started to disagree more and more on this.

the old statesmen	On this point Amory could not agree. It seemed to him that life and history were rife with the strong criminal, keen, but often self-deluding; in politics and business one found him and among the old statesmen and kings and generals; but Burne never agreed and their courses began to split on that point. Burne was drawing farther and farther away from the world about him.	the old politicians

took to reading and walking as almost his only pursuits.	Burne was drawing farther and farther away from the world about him. He resigned the vice-presidency of the senior class and took to reading and walking as almost his only pursuits. He voluntarily attended graduate lectures in philosophy and biology, and sat in all of them with a rather pathetically intent look in his eyes, as if waiting for something the lecturer would never quite come to.	started reading and walking, and they became almost the only things he did.

sat in all of them with a rather pathetically intent look in his eyes, as if waiting for something the lecturer would never quite come to.	He resigned the vice-presidency of the senior class and took to reading and walking as almost his only pursuits. He voluntarily attended graduate lectures in philosophy and biology, and sat in all of them with a rather pathetically intent look in his eyes, as if waiting for something the lecturer would never quite come to. Sometimes Amory would see him squirm in his seat; and his face would light up; he was on fire to debate a point.	He sat in all of them with a sad, focused look, as if he was waiting for the lecturer to say something that never would.

squirm in his seat; and his face would light up; he was on fire to debate a point.	He voluntarily attended graduate lectures in philosophy and biology, and sat in all of them with a rather pathetically intent look in his eyes, as if waiting for something the lecturer would never quite come to. Sometimes Amory would see him squirm in his seat; and his face would light up; he was on fire to debate a point. He grew more abstracted on the street and was even accused of becoming a snob, but Amory knew it was nothing of the sort, and once when Burne passed him four feet off, absolutely unseeingly, his mind a thousand miles away, Amory almost choked with the romantic joy of watching him.	He would fidget in his seat, his face would brighten, and he was eager to argue a point.

nothing of the sort, and once when Burne passed him four feet off, absolutely unseeingly, his mind a thousand miles away, Amory almost choked with the romantic joy of watching him.	Sometimes Amory would see him squirm in his seat; and his face would light up; he was on fire to debate a point. He grew more abstracted on the street and was even accused of becoming a snob, but Amory knew it was nothing of the sort, and once when Burne passed him four feet off, absolutely unseeingly, his mind a thousand miles away, Amory almost choked with the romantic joy of watching him. Burne seemed to be climbing heights where others would be forever unable to get a foothold.	It wasn't that at all, and one time when Burne walked right by him, not even noticing him, his mind clearly elsewhere, Amory was overcome with a romantic happiness just watching him.

heights where others would be forever unable to get a foothold.	He grew more abstracted on the street and was even accused of becoming a snob, but Amory knew it was nothing of the sort, and once when Burne passed him four feet off, absolutely unseeingly, his mind a thousand miles away, Amory almost choked with the romantic joy of watching him. Burne seemed to be climbing heights where others would be forever unable to get a foothold. “I tell you,” Amory declared to Tom, “he’s the first contemporary I’ve ever met whom I’ll admit is my superior in mental capacity.”	levels that others could never reach.

declared to Tom, “he’s the first contemporary I’ve ever met whom I’ll admit is my superior in mental capacity.”	Burne seemed to be climbing heights where others would be forever unable to get a foothold. “I tell you,” Amory declared to Tom, “he’s the first contemporary I’ve ever met whom I’ll admit is my superior in mental capacity.” “It’s a bad time to admit it—people are beginning to think he’s odd.”	declared to Tom, “he’s the first person I've met who is alive now that I’ll admit is smarter than me.”

time to admit it—people are beginning to think he’s odd.”	“I tell you,” Amory declared to Tom, “he’s the first contemporary I’ve ever met whom I’ll admit is my superior in mental capacity.” “It’s a bad time to admit it—people are beginning to think he’s odd.” “He’s way over their heads—you know you think so yourself when you talk to him—Good Lord, Tom, you used to stand out against ‘people.’	It's not a good time to say that—people are starting to think he's strange.

’s way over their heads—you know you think so yourself when you talk to him—Good Lord, Tom, you used to stand out against ‘people.’	“It’s a bad time to admit it—people are beginning to think he’s odd.” “He’s way over their heads—you know you think so yourself when you talk to him—Good Lord, Tom, you used to stand out against ‘people.’ Success has completely conventionalized you.”	He's too smart for them – you know you think so too when you talk to him – Good heavens, Tom, you used to be different from "people."

anybody you’ve ever seen.	“What’s he trying to do—be excessively holy?” “No! not like anybody you’ve ever seen. Never enters the Philadelphian Society.	Anyone you've ever seen.

the Philadelphian Society	“No! not like anybody you’ve ever seen. Never enters the Philadelphian Society. He has no faith in that rot.	the Philadelphian Society

faith in that rot.	Never enters the Philadelphian Society. He has no faith in that rot. He doesn’t believe that public swimming-pools and a kind word in time will right the wrongs of the world; moreover, he takes a drink whenever he feels like it.”	Believes in that nonsense.

wrongs of the world; moreover, he takes a drink whenever he feels like it.”	He has no faith in that rot. He doesn’t believe that public swimming-pools and a kind word in time will right the wrongs of the world; moreover, he takes a drink whenever he feels like it.” “He certainly is getting in wrong.”	wrongs of the world; also, he drinks whenever he wants."

conception of him.”	“No.” “Then you haven’t any conception of him.” The argument ended nowhere, but Amory noticed more than ever how the sentiment toward Burne had changed on the campus.	understanding of him.”

sentiment toward Burne had changed on the campus.	“Then you haven’t any conception of him.” The argument ended nowhere, but Amory noticed more than ever how the sentiment toward Burne had changed on the campus. “It’s odd,” Amory said to Tom one night when they had grown more amicable on the subject, “that the people who violently disapprove of Burne’s radicalism are distinctly the Pharisee class—I mean they’re the best-educated men in college—the editors of the papers, like yourself and Ferrenby, the younger professors.	People's feelings about Burne had changed at the college.

said to Tom one night when they had grown more amicable on the subject, “that the people who violently disapprove of Burne’s radicalism are distinctly the Pharisee class—I mean they’re the best-educated men in college—the editors of the papers, like yourself and Ferrenby, the younger professors.	The argument ended nowhere, but Amory noticed more than ever how the sentiment toward Burne had changed on the campus. “It’s odd,” Amory said to Tom one night when they had grown more amicable on the subject, “that the people who violently disapprove of Burne’s radicalism are distinctly the Pharisee class—I mean they’re the best-educated men in college—the editors of the papers, like yourself and Ferrenby, the younger professors. The illiterate athletes like Langueduc think he’s getting eccentric, but they just say, ‘Good old Burne has got some queer ideas in his head,’ and pass on—the Pharisee class—Gee!	said to Tom one night when they had become more friendly on the subject, "that the people who strongly disapprove of Burne's radical ideas are definitely the most judgmental people—I mean, they're the best-educated men in college—the editors of the papers, like you and Ferrenby, and the younger professors.

the Pharisee class	The argument ended nowhere, but Amory noticed more than ever how the sentiment toward Burne had changed on the campus. “It’s odd,” Amory said to Tom one night when they had grown more amicable on the subject, “that the people who violently disapprove of Burne’s radicalism are distinctly the Pharisee class—I mean they’re the best-educated men in college—the editors of the papers, like yourself and Ferrenby, the younger professors. The illiterate athletes like Langueduc think he’s getting eccentric, but they just say, ‘Good old Burne has got some queer ideas in his head,’ and pass on—the Pharisee class—Gee!	The educated people

the best-educated men	The argument ended nowhere, but Amory noticed more than ever how the sentiment toward Burne had changed on the campus. “It’s odd,” Amory said to Tom one night when they had grown more amicable on the subject, “that the people who violently disapprove of Burne’s radicalism are distinctly the Pharisee class—I mean they’re the best-educated men in college—the editors of the papers, like yourself and Ferrenby, the younger professors. The illiterate athletes like Langueduc think he’s getting eccentric, but they just say, ‘Good old Burne has got some queer ideas in his head,’ and pass on—the Pharisee class—Gee!	The most educated men

Burne’s radicalism	The argument ended nowhere, but Amory noticed more than ever how the sentiment toward Burne had changed on the campus. “It’s odd,” Amory said to Tom one night when they had grown more amicable on the subject, “that the people who violently disapprove of Burne’s radicalism are distinctly the Pharisee class—I mean they’re the best-educated men in college—the editors of the papers, like yourself and Ferrenby, the younger professors. The illiterate athletes like Langueduc think he’s getting eccentric, but they just say, ‘Good old Burne has got some queer ideas in his head,’ and pass on—the Pharisee class—Gee!	Burne's radical ideas

The illiterate athletes	“It’s odd,” Amory said to Tom one night when they had grown more amicable on the subject, “that the people who violently disapprove of Burne’s radicalism are distinctly the Pharisee class—I mean they’re the best-educated men in college—the editors of the papers, like yourself and Ferrenby, the younger professors. The illiterate athletes like Langueduc think he’s getting eccentric, but they just say, ‘Good old Burne has got some queer ideas in his head,’ and pass on—the Pharisee class—Gee! they ridicule him unmercifully.”	The athletes who can't read or write

Good old Burne	“It’s odd,” Amory said to Tom one night when they had grown more amicable on the subject, “that the people who violently disapprove of Burne’s radicalism are distinctly the Pharisee class—I mean they’re the best-educated men in college—the editors of the papers, like yourself and Ferrenby, the younger professors. The illiterate athletes like Langueduc think he’s getting eccentric, but they just say, ‘Good old Burne has got some queer ideas in his head,’ and pass on—the Pharisee class—Gee! they ridicule him unmercifully.”	Burne is a good guy.

the Pharisee class	“It’s odd,” Amory said to Tom one night when they had grown more amicable on the subject, “that the people who violently disapprove of Burne’s radicalism are distinctly the Pharisee class—I mean they’re the best-educated men in college—the editors of the papers, like yourself and Ferrenby, the younger professors. The illiterate athletes like Langueduc think he’s getting eccentric, but they just say, ‘Good old Burne has got some queer ideas in his head,’ and pass on—the Pharisee class—Gee! they ridicule him unmercifully.”	The educated people

some queer ideas	“It’s odd,” Amory said to Tom one night when they had grown more amicable on the subject, “that the people who violently disapprove of Burne’s radicalism are distinctly the Pharisee class—I mean they’re the best-educated men in college—the editors of the papers, like yourself and Ferrenby, the younger professors. The illiterate athletes like Langueduc think he’s getting eccentric, but they just say, ‘Good old Burne has got some queer ideas in his head,’ and pass on—the Pharisee class—Gee! they ridicule him unmercifully.”	strange ideas

athletes like Langueduc think he’s getting eccentric, but they just say, ‘Good old Burne has got some queer ideas in his head,’ and pass on—the Pharisee class—Gee!	“It’s odd,” Amory said to Tom one night when they had grown more amicable on the subject, “that the people who violently disapprove of Burne’s radicalism are distinctly the Pharisee class—I mean they’re the best-educated men in college—the editors of the papers, like yourself and Ferrenby, the younger professors. The illiterate athletes like Langueduc think he’s getting eccentric, but they just say, ‘Good old Burne has got some queer ideas in his head,’ and pass on—the Pharisee class—Gee! they ridicule him unmercifully.”	Athletes like Langueduc think he's getting strange, but they just say, 'Good old Burne has some weird ideas,' and move on – the Pharisee class – Wow!

McCosh walk	they ridicule him unmercifully.” The next morning he met Burne hurrying along McCosh walk after a recitation. “Whither bound, Tsar?”	McCosh Walk

hurrying along McCosh walk after a recitation.	they ridicule him unmercifully.” The next morning he met Burne hurrying along McCosh walk after a recitation. “Whither bound, Tsar?”	hurrying along McCosh Walk after a class.

, Tsar	The next morning he met Burne hurrying along McCosh walk after a recitation. “Whither bound, Tsar?” “Over to the Prince office to see Ferrenby,” he waved a copy of the morning’s Princetonian at Amory.	"Where are you going, Tsar?"

waved a copy of the morning’s Princetonian at Amory.	“Whither bound, Tsar?” “Over to the Prince office to see Ferrenby,” he waved a copy of the morning’s Princetonian at Amory. “He wrote this editorial.”	He waved a copy of the morning's Princetonian at Amory.

the morning’s Princetonian	“Whither bound, Tsar?” “Over to the Prince office to see Ferrenby,” he waved a copy of the morning’s Princetonian at Amory. “He wrote this editorial.”	The newspaper called "Princetonian" from this morning.

the ensuing conversation	Either I’ve misjudged him or he’s suddenly become the world’s worst radical.” Burne hurried on, and it was several days before Amory heard an account of the ensuing conversation. Burne had come into the editor’s sanctum displaying the paper cheerfully.	the conversation that happened afterward

was several days before Amory heard an account of the ensuing conversation.	Either I’ve misjudged him or he’s suddenly become the world’s worst radical.” Burne hurried on, and it was several days before Amory heard an account of the ensuing conversation. Burne had come into the editor’s sanctum displaying the paper cheerfully.	It was several days before Amory heard what they said to each other next.

the editor’s sanctum	Burne hurried on, and it was several days before Amory heard an account of the ensuing conversation. Burne had come into the editor’s sanctum displaying the paper cheerfully. “Hello, Jesse.”	the editor's office

sanctum displaying the paper cheerfully.	Burne hurried on, and it was several days before Amory heard an account of the ensuing conversation. Burne had come into the editor’s sanctum displaying the paper cheerfully. “Hello, Jesse.”	showing the paper cheerfully.

boy—didn’t know you stooped that low.”	“I just read your editorial.” “Good boy—didn’t know you stooped that low.” “Jesse, you startled me.”	I didn't know you would do something like that.

get after you if you pull this irreligious stuff?”	“Jesse, you startled me.” “How so?” “Aren’t you afraid the faculty’ll get after you if you pull this irreligious stuff?” “What?”	get in trouble with the faculty if you do this stuff that goes against religion?

this irreligious stuff	“Jesse, you startled me.” “How so?” “Aren’t you afraid the faculty’ll get after you if you pull this irreligious stuff?” “What?”	this disrespectful stuff

was on the coaching system.”	“Like this morning.” “What the devil—that editorial was on the coaching system.” “Yes, but that quotation—” Jesse sat up.	was about the coaching system.

“What quotation	“Yes, but that quotation—” Jesse sat up. “What quotation?” “You know: ‘He who is not with me is against me.’ ” “Well—what about it?”	"Which quotation?"

only coarse distinctions	“Well, you say here—let me see.” Burne opened the paper and read: “ ‘He who is not with me is against me, as that gentleman said who was notoriously capable of only coarse distinctions and puerile generalities.’ ” “What of it?”	Only simple differences.

capable of only coarse distinctions and puerile generalities.’ ”	“Well, you say here—let me see.” Burne opened the paper and read: “ ‘He who is not with me is against me, as that gentleman said who was notoriously capable of only coarse distinctions and puerile generalities.’ ” “What of it?”	capable of only basic differences and childish generalities.

puerile generalities	“Well, you say here—let me see.” Burne opened the paper and read: “ ‘He who is not with me is against me, as that gentleman said who was notoriously capable of only coarse distinctions and puerile generalities.’ ” “What of it?”	Childish oversimplifications

roared with laughter.	Good Lord, I’ve forgotten.” Burne roared with laughter. “Oh, Jesse, oh, good, kind Jesse.”	laughed loudly.

said it, for Pete’s sake?”	“Oh, Jesse, oh, good, kind Jesse.” “Who said it, for Pete’s sake?” “Well,” said Burne, recovering his voice, “St. Matthew attributes it to Christ.”	said it, for goodness sake?

Pete’s sake	“Oh, Jesse, oh, good, kind Jesse.” “Who said it, for Pete’s sake?” “Well,” said Burne, recovering his voice, “St. Matthew attributes it to Christ.”	For goodness sake

collapsed backward into the wastebasket.	“Well,” said Burne, recovering his voice, “St. Matthew attributes it to Christ.” “My God!” cried Jesse, and collapsed backward into the wastebasket.	fell backward into the trash can.

stick-of-candy glamour might penetrate his disposition.	The weeks tore by. Amory wandered occasionally to New York on the chance of finding a new shining green autobus, that its stick-of-candy glamour might penetrate his disposition. One day he ventured into a stock-company revival of a play whose name was faintly familiar.	its charming appeal might affect his mood.

a new shining green autobus	The weeks tore by. Amory wandered occasionally to New York on the chance of finding a new shining green autobus, that its stick-of-candy glamour might penetrate his disposition. One day he ventured into a stock-company revival of a play whose name was faintly familiar.	a new, shiny, green bus

a stock-company revival	Amory wandered occasionally to New York on the chance of finding a new shining green autobus, that its stick-of-candy glamour might penetrate his disposition. One day he ventured into a stock-company revival of a play whose name was faintly familiar. The curtain rose—he watched casually as a girl entered.	A local theater group's remake

play whose name was faintly familiar.	Amory wandered occasionally to New York on the chance of finding a new shining green autobus, that its stick-of-candy glamour might penetrate his disposition. One day he ventured into a stock-company revival of a play whose name was faintly familiar. The curtain rose—he watched casually as a girl entered.	A play he kind of recognized.

watched casually as a girl entered.	One day he ventured into a stock-company revival of a play whose name was faintly familiar. The curtain rose—he watched casually as a girl entered. A few phrases rang in his ear and touched a faint chord of memory.	He watched without paying much attention as a girl came in.

chord of memory.	The curtain rose—he watched casually as a girl entered. A few phrases rang in his ear and touched a faint chord of memory. Where—?	A memory.

a faint chord	The curtain rose—he watched casually as a girl entered. A few phrases rang in his ear and touched a faint chord of memory. Where—?	A faint memory

such a poor little fool	When—? Then he seemed to hear a voice whispering beside him, a very soft, vibrant voice: “Oh, I’m such a poor little fool; do tell me when I do wrong.” The solution came in a flash and he had a quick, glad memory of Isabelle.	I'm such a poor, silly person

a very soft, vibrant voice	When—? Then he seemed to hear a voice whispering beside him, a very soft, vibrant voice: “Oh, I’m such a poor little fool; do tell me when I do wrong.” The solution came in a flash and he had a quick, glad memory of Isabelle.	a very soft, lively voice

voice: “Oh, I’m such a poor little fool; do tell me when I do wrong.”	When—? Then he seemed to hear a voice whispering beside him, a very soft, vibrant voice: “Oh, I’m such a poor little fool; do tell me when I do wrong.” The solution came in a flash and he had a quick, glad memory of Isabelle.	voice: “Oh, I'm such a silly person; please tell me when I make a mistake.”

memory of Isabelle.	Then he seemed to hear a voice whispering beside him, a very soft, vibrant voice: “Oh, I’m such a poor little fool; do tell me when I do wrong.” The solution came in a flash and he had a quick, glad memory of Isabelle. He found a blank space on his programme, and began to scribble rapidly: “Here in the figured dark I watch once more, There, with the curtain, roll the years away; Two years of years—there was an idle day Of ours, when happy endings didn’t bore Our unfermented souls; I could adore Your eager face beside me, wide-eyed, gay, Smiling a repertoire while the poor play Reached me as a faint ripple reaches shore.	He remembered Isabelle.

a faint ripple	The solution came in a flash and he had a quick, glad memory of Isabelle. He found a blank space on his programme, and began to scribble rapidly: “Here in the figured dark I watch once more, There, with the curtain, roll the years away; Two years of years—there was an idle day Of ours, when happy endings didn’t bore Our unfermented souls; I could adore Your eager face beside me, wide-eyed, gay, Smiling a repertoire while the poor play Reached me as a faint ripple reaches shore. Yawning and wondering an evening through, I watch alone.	a weak echo

Our unfermented souls	The solution came in a flash and he had a quick, glad memory of Isabelle. He found a blank space on his programme, and began to scribble rapidly: “Here in the figured dark I watch once more, There, with the curtain, roll the years away; Two years of years—there was an idle day Of ours, when happy endings didn’t bore Our unfermented souls; I could adore Your eager face beside me, wide-eyed, gay, Smiling a repertoire while the poor play Reached me as a faint ripple reaches shore. Yawning and wondering an evening through, I watch alone.	Our innocent souls

Here in the figured dark I watch once more, There, with the curtain, roll the years away; Two years of years—there was an idle day Of ours, when happy endings didn’t bore Our unfermented souls; I could adore Your eager face beside me, wide-eyed, gay, Smiling a repertoire while the poor play Reached me as a faint ripple reaches shore.	The solution came in a flash and he had a quick, glad memory of Isabelle. He found a blank space on his programme, and began to scribble rapidly: “Here in the figured dark I watch once more, There, with the curtain, roll the years away; Two years of years—there was an idle day Of ours, when happy endings didn’t bore Our unfermented souls; I could adore Your eager face beside me, wide-eyed, gay, Smiling a repertoire while the poor play Reached me as a faint ripple reaches shore. Yawning and wondering an evening through, I watch alone.	I'm watching again in this patterned darkness. The years are passing, like the curtain rolling away. It's been a long time, and I remember a carefree day we had, when happy endings didn't seem boring to us. I loved your excited, wide-eyed, happy face, smiling your many smiles while the play reached me like a soft ripple on the shore.

scene which, somehow, did have charms; You wept a bit, and I grew sad for you Right here!	Yawning and wondering an evening through, I watch alone. and chatterings, of course, Spoil the one scene which, somehow, did have charms; You wept a bit, and I grew sad for you Right here! Where Mr. X defends divorce And What’s-Her-Name falls fainting in his arms.”	The scene had some appeal, and you cried a little, and I felt sad for you right here!

fainting in his arms.”	and chatterings, of course, Spoil the one scene which, somehow, did have charms; You wept a bit, and I grew sad for you Right here! Where Mr. X defends divorce And What’s-Her-Name falls fainting in his arms.”	fainting in his arms.”

getting home at night?” demanded Amory, interested.	If you use any discretion a ghost can never get you in a bedroom.” “Go on, s’pose you think there’s maybe a ghost in your bedroom—what measures do you take on getting home at night?” demanded Amory, interested. “Take a stick,” answered Alec, with ponderous reverence, “one about the length of a broom-handle.	Getting home at night?" Amory asked, curious.

length of a broom-handle.	“Go on, s’pose you think there’s maybe a ghost in your bedroom—what measures do you take on getting home at night?” demanded Amory, interested. “Take a stick,” answered Alec, with ponderous reverence, “one about the length of a broom-handle. Now, the first thing to do is to get the room cleared—to do this you rush with your eyes closed into your study and turn on the lights—next, approaching the closet, carefully run the stick in the door three or four times.	The length of a broom handle.

ponderous reverence	“Go on, s’pose you think there’s maybe a ghost in your bedroom—what measures do you take on getting home at night?” demanded Amory, interested. “Take a stick,” answered Alec, with ponderous reverence, “one about the length of a broom-handle. Now, the first thing to do is to get the room cleared—to do this you rush with your eyes closed into your study and turn on the lights—next, approaching the closet, carefully run the stick in the door three or four times.	Serious respect

a broom-handle	“Go on, s’pose you think there’s maybe a ghost in your bedroom—what measures do you take on getting home at night?” demanded Amory, interested. “Take a stick,” answered Alec, with ponderous reverence, “one about the length of a broom-handle. Now, the first thing to do is to get the room cleared—to do this you rush with your eyes closed into your study and turn on the lights—next, approaching the closet, carefully run the stick in the door three or four times.	the length of a broom handle

closed into your study and turn on the lights—next, approaching the closet, carefully run the stick in the door three or four times.	“Take a stick,” answered Alec, with ponderous reverence, “one about the length of a broom-handle. Now, the first thing to do is to get the room cleared—to do this you rush with your eyes closed into your study and turn on the lights—next, approaching the closet, carefully run the stick in the door three or four times. Then, if nothing happens, you can look in.	Rush into your study with your eyes closed and turn on the lights. Then, go to the closet and carefully poke the stick into the door three or four times.

run the stick in viciously first—never look first!”	Then, if nothing happens, you can look in. Always, always run the stick in viciously first—never look first!” “Of course, that’s the ancient Celtic school,” said Tom gravely.	First, shove the stick in hard, never look first!

for behind all doors—” “And the bed,” Amory suggested.	“Yes—but they usually pray first. Anyway, you use this method to clear the closets and also for behind all doors—” “And the bed,” Amory suggested. “Oh, Amory, no!” cried Alec in horror.	for behind all doors—" "And the bed," Amory suggested.

Oh, Amory	Anyway, you use this method to clear the closets and also for behind all doors—” “And the bed,” Amory suggested. “Oh, Amory, no!” cried Alec in horror. “That isn’t the way—the bed requires different tactics—let the bed alone, as you value your reason—if there is a ghost in the room and that’s only about a third of the time, it is almost always under the bed.”	Oh, Amory

Amory, no!” cried Alec in horror.	Anyway, you use this method to clear the closets and also for behind all doors—” “And the bed,” Amory suggested. “Oh, Amory, no!” cried Alec in horror. “That isn’t the way—the bed requires different tactics—let the bed alone, as you value your reason—if there is a ghost in the room and that’s only about a third of the time, it is almost always under the bed.”	Amory, no!” Alec cried in horror.

different tactics	“Oh, Amory, no!” cried Alec in horror. “That isn’t the way—the bed requires different tactics—let the bed alone, as you value your reason—if there is a ghost in the room and that’s only about a third of the time, it is almost always under the bed.” “Well” Amory began.	different strategies

ghost in the room and that’s only about a third of the time, it is almost always under the bed.”	“Oh, Amory, no!” cried Alec in horror. “That isn’t the way—the bed requires different tactics—let the bed alone, as you value your reason—if there is a ghost in the room and that’s only about a third of the time, it is almost always under the bed.” “Well” Amory began.	The ghost is in the room, which happens roughly a third of the time, and it's almost always under the bed.

once in bed, you’re safe; he may lie around under the bed all night, but you’re safe as daylight.	“Of course you never look. You stand in the middle of the floor and before he knows what you’re going to do make a sudden leap for the bed—never walk near the bed; to a ghost your ankle is your most vulnerable part—once in bed, you’re safe; he may lie around under the bed all night, but you’re safe as daylight. If you still have doubts pull the blanket over your head.”	Once you're in bed, you're safe. He might stay under the bed all night, but you're as safe as if it were daytime.

a sudden leap	“Of course you never look. You stand in the middle of the floor and before he knows what you’re going to do make a sudden leap for the bed—never walk near the bed; to a ghost your ankle is your most vulnerable part—once in bed, you’re safe; he may lie around under the bed all night, but you’re safe as daylight. If you still have doubts pull the blanket over your head.”	jump suddenly

All that’s very interesting, Tom.”	If you still have doubts pull the blanket over your head.” “All that’s very interesting, Tom.” “Isn’t it?”	That's very interesting, Tom.

a few new feathers	Amory was enjoying college immensely again. The sense of going forward in a direct, determined line had come back; youth was stirring and shaking out a few new feathers. He had even stored enough surplus energy to sally into a new pose.	some new qualities

going forward in a direct, determined line had come back; youth was stirring and shaking out a few new feathers.	Amory was enjoying college immensely again. The sense of going forward in a direct, determined line had come back; youth was stirring and shaking out a few new feathers. He had even stored enough surplus energy to sally into a new pose.	He felt like he was making progress again; he was young and starting to try new things.

all this ‘distracted’ stuff	He had even stored enough surplus energy to sally into a new pose. “What’s the idea of all this ‘distracted’ stuff, Amory?” asked Alec one day, and then as Amory pretended to be cramped over his book in a daze: “Oh, don’t try to act Burne, the mystic, to me.” Amory looked up innocently.	All this "distracted" behavior

act Burne, the mystic, to me.”	He had even stored enough surplus energy to sally into a new pose. “What’s the idea of all this ‘distracted’ stuff, Amory?” asked Alec one day, and then as Amory pretended to be cramped over his book in a daze: “Oh, don’t try to act Burne, the mystic, to me.” Amory looked up innocently.	Don't try to act like Burne, the mystic, with me.

, Amory	He had even stored enough surplus energy to sally into a new pose. “What’s the idea of all this ‘distracted’ stuff, Amory?” asked Alec one day, and then as Amory pretended to be cramped over his book in a daze: “Oh, don’t try to act Burne, the mystic, to me.” Amory looked up innocently.	, Amory

read yourself into a rhapsody with—let’s see the book.”	“What?” mimicked Alec. “Are you trying to read yourself into a rhapsody with—let’s see the book.” He snatched it; regarded it derisively.	Read yourself into a state of bliss with—let me see the book.

Life of St. Teresa,” read Alec aloud.	“Well?” said Amory a little stiffly. “The Life of St. Teresa,” read Alec aloud. “Oh, my gosh!”	"Life of St. Teresa," Alec read aloud.

telling people guilelessly that I think I’m a genius, let me do it.”	“Well, then, don’t spoil it. If I enjoy going around telling people guilelessly that I think I’m a genius, let me do it.” “You’re getting a reputation for being eccentric,” said Alec, laughing, “if that’s what you mean.”	Let me keep telling people honestly that I think I'm a genius.

laughing, “if that’s what you mean.”	If I enjoy going around telling people guilelessly that I think I’m a genius, let me do it.” “You’re getting a reputation for being eccentric,” said Alec, laughing, “if that’s what you mean.” Amory finally prevailed, and Alec agreed to accept his face value in the presence of others if he was allowed rest periods when they were alone; so Amory “ran it out” at a great rate, bringing the most eccentric characters to dinner, wild-eyed grad students, preceptors with strange theories of God and government, to the cynical amazement of the supercilious Cottage Club.	laughing, "if that's what you mean."

amazement of the supercilious Cottage Club.	“You’re getting a reputation for being eccentric,” said Alec, laughing, “if that’s what you mean.” Amory finally prevailed, and Alec agreed to accept his face value in the presence of others if he was allowed rest periods when they were alone; so Amory “ran it out” at a great rate, bringing the most eccentric characters to dinner, wild-eyed grad students, preceptors with strange theories of God and government, to the cynical amazement of the supercilious Cottage Club. As February became slashed by sun and moved cheerfully into March, Amory went several times to spend weekends with Monsignor; once he took Burne, with great success, for he took equal pride and delight in displaying them to each other.	The supercilious Cottage Club was amazed.

the supercilious Cottage Club	“You’re getting a reputation for being eccentric,” said Alec, laughing, “if that’s what you mean.” Amory finally prevailed, and Alec agreed to accept his face value in the presence of others if he was allowed rest periods when they were alone; so Amory “ran it out” at a great rate, bringing the most eccentric characters to dinner, wild-eyed grad students, preceptors with strange theories of God and government, to the cynical amazement of the supercilious Cottage Club. As February became slashed by sun and moved cheerfully into March, Amory went several times to spend weekends with Monsignor; once he took Burne, with great success, for he took equal pride and delight in displaying them to each other.	The snobby Cottage Club

the most eccentric characters	“You’re getting a reputation for being eccentric,” said Alec, laughing, “if that’s what you mean.” Amory finally prevailed, and Alec agreed to accept his face value in the presence of others if he was allowed rest periods when they were alone; so Amory “ran it out” at a great rate, bringing the most eccentric characters to dinner, wild-eyed grad students, preceptors with strange theories of God and government, to the cynical amazement of the supercilious Cottage Club. As February became slashed by sun and moved cheerfully into March, Amory went several times to spend weekends with Monsignor; once he took Burne, with great success, for he took equal pride and delight in displaying them to each other.	the weirdest people

the cynical amazement	“You’re getting a reputation for being eccentric,” said Alec, laughing, “if that’s what you mean.” Amory finally prevailed, and Alec agreed to accept his face value in the presence of others if he was allowed rest periods when they were alone; so Amory “ran it out” at a great rate, bringing the most eccentric characters to dinner, wild-eyed grad students, preceptors with strange theories of God and government, to the cynical amazement of the supercilious Cottage Club. As February became slashed by sun and moved cheerfully into March, Amory went several times to spend weekends with Monsignor; once he took Burne, with great success, for he took equal pride and delight in displaying them to each other.	the sarcastic surprise

went several times to spend weekends with Monsignor; once he took Burne, with great success, for he took equal pride and delight in displaying them to each other.	Amory finally prevailed, and Alec agreed to accept his face value in the presence of others if he was allowed rest periods when they were alone; so Amory “ran it out” at a great rate, bringing the most eccentric characters to dinner, wild-eyed grad students, preceptors with strange theories of God and government, to the cynical amazement of the supercilious Cottage Club. As February became slashed by sun and moved cheerfully into March, Amory went several times to spend weekends with Monsignor; once he took Burne, with great success, for he took equal pride and delight in displaying them to each other. Monsignor took him several times to see Thornton Hancock, and once or twice to the house of a Mrs. Lawrence, a type of Rome-haunting American whom Amory liked immediately.	went several times to spend weekends with Monsignor; one time he brought Burne, and it went very well, because he enjoyed showing them off to each other equally.

a Mrs. Lawrence	As February became slashed by sun and moved cheerfully into March, Amory went several times to spend weekends with Monsignor; once he took Burne, with great success, for he took equal pride and delight in displaying them to each other. Monsignor took him several times to see Thornton Hancock, and once or twice to the house of a Mrs. Lawrence, a type of Rome-haunting American whom Amory liked immediately. Then one day came a letter from Monsignor, which appended an interesting P.S.: “Do you know,” it ran, “that your third cousin, Clara Page, widowed six months and very poor, is living in Philadelphia?	a Mrs. Lawrence

Rome-haunting American	As February became slashed by sun and moved cheerfully into March, Amory went several times to spend weekends with Monsignor; once he took Burne, with great success, for he took equal pride and delight in displaying them to each other. Monsignor took him several times to see Thornton Hancock, and once or twice to the house of a Mrs. Lawrence, a type of Rome-haunting American whom Amory liked immediately. Then one day came a letter from Monsignor, which appended an interesting P.S.: “Do you know,” it ran, “that your third cousin, Clara Page, widowed six months and very poor, is living in Philadelphia?	American who frequently visits Rome

Lawrence, a type of Rome-haunting American whom Amory liked immediately.	As February became slashed by sun and moved cheerfully into March, Amory went several times to spend weekends with Monsignor; once he took Burne, with great success, for he took equal pride and delight in displaying them to each other. Monsignor took him several times to see Thornton Hancock, and once or twice to the house of a Mrs. Lawrence, a type of Rome-haunting American whom Amory liked immediately. Then one day came a letter from Monsignor, which appended an interesting P.S.: “Do you know,” it ran, “that your third cousin, Clara Page, widowed six months and very poor, is living in Philadelphia?	Amory liked Mrs. Lawrence, who was the type of American who always seemed to be in Rome, immediately.

your third cousin	Monsignor took him several times to see Thornton Hancock, and once or twice to the house of a Mrs. Lawrence, a type of Rome-haunting American whom Amory liked immediately. Then one day came a letter from Monsignor, which appended an interesting P.S.: “Do you know,” it ran, “that your third cousin, Clara Page, widowed six months and very poor, is living in Philadelphia? I don’t think you’ve ever met her, but I wish, as a favor to me, you’d go to see her.	Your third cousin

an interesting P.S.	Monsignor took him several times to see Thornton Hancock, and once or twice to the house of a Mrs. Lawrence, a type of Rome-haunting American whom Amory liked immediately. Then one day came a letter from Monsignor, which appended an interesting P.S.: “Do you know,” it ran, “that your third cousin, Clara Page, widowed six months and very poor, is living in Philadelphia? I don’t think you’ve ever met her, but I wish, as a favor to me, you’d go to see her.	an interesting postscript

’s rather a remarkable woman, and just about your age.”	I don’t think you’ve ever met her, but I wish, as a favor to me, you’d go to see her. To my mind, she’s rather a remarkable woman, and just about your age.” Amory sighed and decided to go, as a favor.	She's a remarkable woman, and about your age.

ripply golden hair	She was immemorial. Amory wasn’t good enough for Clara, Clara of ripply golden hair, but then no man was. Her goodness was above the prosy morals of the husband-seeker, apart from the dull literature of female virtue.	wavy golden hair

good enough for Clara, Clara of ripply golden hair, but then no man was.	She was immemorial. Amory wasn’t good enough for Clara, Clara of ripply golden hair, but then no man was. Her goodness was above the prosy morals of the husband-seeker, apart from the dull literature of female virtue.	No man was good enough for Clara, Clara with wavy golden hair.

apart from the dull literature of female virtue.	Amory wasn’t good enough for Clara, Clara of ripply golden hair, but then no man was. Her goodness was above the prosy morals of the husband-seeker, apart from the dull literature of female virtue. Sorrow lay lightly around her, and when Amory found her in Philadelphia he thought her steely blue eyes held only happiness; a latent strength, a realism, was brought to its fullest development by the facts that she was compelled to face.	She wasn't interested in the boring rules of how women should behave.

the prosy morals	Amory wasn’t good enough for Clara, Clara of ripply golden hair, but then no man was. Her goodness was above the prosy morals of the husband-seeker, apart from the dull literature of female virtue. Sorrow lay lightly around her, and when Amory found her in Philadelphia he thought her steely blue eyes held only happiness; a latent strength, a realism, was brought to its fullest development by the facts that she was compelled to face.	the ordinary morals

the dull literature	Amory wasn’t good enough for Clara, Clara of ripply golden hair, but then no man was. Her goodness was above the prosy morals of the husband-seeker, apart from the dull literature of female virtue. Sorrow lay lightly around her, and when Amory found her in Philadelphia he thought her steely blue eyes held only happiness; a latent strength, a realism, was brought to its fullest development by the facts that she was compelled to face.	boring expectations

a latent strength	Her goodness was above the prosy morals of the husband-seeker, apart from the dull literature of female virtue. Sorrow lay lightly around her, and when Amory found her in Philadelphia he thought her steely blue eyes held only happiness; a latent strength, a realism, was brought to its fullest development by the facts that she was compelled to face. She was alone in the world, with two small children, little money, and, worst of all, a host of friends.	a hidden strength

thought her steely blue eyes held only happiness; a latent strength, a realism, was brought to its fullest development by the facts that she was compelled to face.	Her goodness was above the prosy morals of the husband-seeker, apart from the dull literature of female virtue. Sorrow lay lightly around her, and when Amory found her in Philadelphia he thought her steely blue eyes held only happiness; a latent strength, a realism, was brought to its fullest development by the facts that she was compelled to face. She was alone in the world, with two small children, little money, and, worst of all, a host of friends.	He thought her sharp blue eyes showed only happiness; a hidden strength and practicality grew stronger because of the difficulties she had to deal with.

her steely blue eyes	Her goodness was above the prosy morals of the husband-seeker, apart from the dull literature of female virtue. Sorrow lay lightly around her, and when Amory found her in Philadelphia he thought her steely blue eyes held only happiness; a latent strength, a realism, was brought to its fullest development by the facts that she was compelled to face. She was alone in the world, with two small children, little money, and, worst of all, a host of friends.	Her cold blue eyes

was alone in the world, with two small children, little money, and, worst of all, a host of friends.	Sorrow lay lightly around her, and when Amory found her in Philadelphia he thought her steely blue eyes held only happiness; a latent strength, a realism, was brought to its fullest development by the facts that she was compelled to face. She was alone in the world, with two small children, little money, and, worst of all, a host of friends. He saw her that winter in Philadelphia entertaining a houseful of men for an evening, when he knew she had not a servant in the house except the little colored girl guarding the babies overhead.	She was alone in the world, with two small children, little money, and, worst of all, many friends.

knew she had not a servant in the house except the little colored girl guarding the babies overhead.	She was alone in the world, with two small children, little money, and, worst of all, a host of friends. He saw her that winter in Philadelphia entertaining a houseful of men for an evening, when he knew she had not a servant in the house except the little colored girl guarding the babies overhead. He saw one of the greatest libertines in that city, a man who was habitually drunk and notorious at home and abroad, sitting opposite her for an evening, discussing girls’ boarding-schools with a sort of innocent excitement.	knew she didn't have any servants in the house except for the little Black girl who was watching the babies upstairs.

not a servant	She was alone in the world, with two small children, little money, and, worst of all, a host of friends. He saw her that winter in Philadelphia entertaining a houseful of men for an evening, when he knew she had not a servant in the house except the little colored girl guarding the babies overhead. He saw one of the greatest libertines in that city, a man who was habitually drunk and notorious at home and abroad, sitting opposite her for an evening, discussing girls’ boarding-schools with a sort of innocent excitement.	no servant

girls’ boarding-schools	He saw her that winter in Philadelphia entertaining a houseful of men for an evening, when he knew she had not a servant in the house except the little colored girl guarding the babies overhead. He saw one of the greatest libertines in that city, a man who was habitually drunk and notorious at home and abroad, sitting opposite her for an evening, discussing girls’ boarding-schools with a sort of innocent excitement. What a twist Clara had to her mind!	Girls' boarding schools.

the greatest libertines	He saw her that winter in Philadelphia entertaining a houseful of men for an evening, when he knew she had not a servant in the house except the little colored girl guarding the babies overhead. He saw one of the greatest libertines in that city, a man who was habitually drunk and notorious at home and abroad, sitting opposite her for an evening, discussing girls’ boarding-schools with a sort of innocent excitement. What a twist Clara had to her mind!	the most immoral men

fascinating and almost brilliant conversation	What a twist Clara had to her mind! She could make fascinating and almost brilliant conversation out of the thinnest air that ever floated through a drawing-room. The idea that the girl was poverty-stricken had appealed to Amory’s sense of situation.	Very interesting and almost clever conversation

air that ever floated through a drawing-room.	What a twist Clara had to her mind! She could make fascinating and almost brilliant conversation out of the thinnest air that ever floated through a drawing-room. The idea that the girl was poverty-stricken had appealed to Amory’s sense of situation.	thin air.

Amory’s sense	She could make fascinating and almost brilliant conversation out of the thinnest air that ever floated through a drawing-room. The idea that the girl was poverty-stricken had appealed to Amory’s sense of situation. He arrived in Philadelphia expecting to be told that 921 Ark Street was in a miserable lane of hovels.	Amory's feeling

appealed to Amory’s sense of situation.	She could make fascinating and almost brilliant conversation out of the thinnest air that ever floated through a drawing-room. The idea that the girl was poverty-stricken had appealed to Amory’s sense of situation. He arrived in Philadelphia expecting to be told that 921 Ark Street was in a miserable lane of hovels.	Amory found it interesting.

921 Ark Street	The idea that the girl was poverty-stricken had appealed to Amory’s sense of situation. He arrived in Philadelphia expecting to be told that 921 Ark Street was in a miserable lane of hovels. He was even disappointed when it proved to be nothing of the sort.	921 Ark Street

a miserable lane	The idea that the girl was poverty-stricken had appealed to Amory’s sense of situation. He arrived in Philadelphia expecting to be told that 921 Ark Street was in a miserable lane of hovels. He was even disappointed when it proved to be nothing of the sort.	a terrible street

lane of hovels.	The idea that the girl was poverty-stricken had appealed to Amory’s sense of situation. He arrived in Philadelphia expecting to be told that 921 Ark Street was in a miserable lane of hovels. He was even disappointed when it proved to be nothing of the sort.	A street of very poor houses.

disappointed when it proved to be nothing of the sort.	He arrived in Philadelphia expecting to be told that 921 Ark Street was in a miserable lane of hovels. He was even disappointed when it proved to be nothing of the sort. It was an old house that had been in her husband’s family for years.	He was disappointed when it wasn't like that.

been in her husband’s family for years.	He was even disappointed when it proved to be nothing of the sort. It was an old house that had been in her husband’s family for years. An elderly aunt, who objected to having it sold, had put ten years’ taxes with a lawyer and pranced off to Honolulu, leaving Clara to struggle with the heating-problem as best she could.	had belonged to her husband's family for years.

her husband’s family	He was even disappointed when it proved to be nothing of the sort. It was an old house that had been in her husband’s family for years. An elderly aunt, who objected to having it sold, had put ten years’ taxes with a lawyer and pranced off to Honolulu, leaving Clara to struggle with the heating-problem as best she could.	Her husband's family

ten years’ taxes	It was an old house that had been in her husband’s family for years. An elderly aunt, who objected to having it sold, had put ten years’ taxes with a lawyer and pranced off to Honolulu, leaving Clara to struggle with the heating-problem as best she could. So no wild-haired woman with a hungry baby at her breast and a sad Amelia-like look greeted him.	Taxes for ten years

An elderly aunt	It was an old house that had been in her husband’s family for years. An elderly aunt, who objected to having it sold, had put ten years’ taxes with a lawyer and pranced off to Honolulu, leaving Clara to struggle with the heating-problem as best she could. So no wild-haired woman with a hungry baby at her breast and a sad Amelia-like look greeted him.	An elderly aunt

struggle with the heating-problem as best she could.	It was an old house that had been in her husband’s family for years. An elderly aunt, who objected to having it sold, had put ten years’ taxes with a lawyer and pranced off to Honolulu, leaving Clara to struggle with the heating-problem as best she could. So no wild-haired woman with a hungry baby at her breast and a sad Amelia-like look greeted him.	deal with the heating problem as well as she could.

woman with a hungry baby at her breast and a sad Amelia-like look greeted him.	An elderly aunt, who objected to having it sold, had put ten years’ taxes with a lawyer and pranced off to Honolulu, leaving Clara to struggle with the heating-problem as best she could. So no wild-haired woman with a hungry baby at her breast and a sad Amelia-like look greeted him. Instead, Amory would have thought from his reception that she had not a care in the world.	A woman with a hungry baby and a sad look did not greet him.

thought from his reception that she had not a care in the world.	So no wild-haired woman with a hungry baby at her breast and a sad Amelia-like look greeted him. Instead, Amory would have thought from his reception that she had not a care in the world. A calm virility and a dreamy humor, marked contrasts to her level-headedness—into these moods she slipped sometimes as a refuge.	thought, from how she acted, that she didn't have a worry in the world.

a dreamy humor	Instead, Amory would have thought from his reception that she had not a care in the world. A calm virility and a dreamy humor, marked contrasts to her level-headedness—into these moods she slipped sometimes as a refuge. She could do the most prosy things (though she was wise enough never to stultify herself with such “household arts” as knitting and embroidery), yet immediately afterward pick up a book and let her imagination rove as a formless cloud with the wind.	a dreamy sense of humor

her level-headedness	Instead, Amory would have thought from his reception that she had not a care in the world. A calm virility and a dreamy humor, marked contrasts to her level-headedness—into these moods she slipped sometimes as a refuge. She could do the most prosy things (though she was wise enough never to stultify herself with such “household arts” as knitting and embroidery), yet immediately afterward pick up a book and let her imagination rove as a formless cloud with the wind.	her practicality

A calm virility	Instead, Amory would have thought from his reception that she had not a care in the world. A calm virility and a dreamy humor, marked contrasts to her level-headedness—into these moods she slipped sometimes as a refuge. She could do the most prosy things (though she was wise enough never to stultify herself with such “household arts” as knitting and embroidery), yet immediately afterward pick up a book and let her imagination rove as a formless cloud with the wind.	A calm strength

marked contrasts to her level-headedness—into these moods she slipped sometimes as a refuge.	Instead, Amory would have thought from his reception that she had not a care in the world. A calm virility and a dreamy humor, marked contrasts to her level-headedness—into these moods she slipped sometimes as a refuge. She could do the most prosy things (though she was wise enough never to stultify herself with such “household arts” as knitting and embroidery), yet immediately afterward pick up a book and let her imagination rove as a formless cloud with the wind.	She sometimes used these contrasting moods as an escape from her practicality.

a formless cloud	A calm virility and a dreamy humor, marked contrasts to her level-headedness—into these moods she slipped sometimes as a refuge. She could do the most prosy things (though she was wise enough never to stultify herself with such “household arts” as knitting and embroidery), yet immediately afterward pick up a book and let her imagination rove as a formless cloud with the wind. Deepest of all in her personality was the golden radiance that she diffused around her.	a shapeless cloud

the most prosy things	A calm virility and a dreamy humor, marked contrasts to her level-headedness—into these moods she slipped sometimes as a refuge. She could do the most prosy things (though she was wise enough never to stultify herself with such “household arts” as knitting and embroidery), yet immediately afterward pick up a book and let her imagination rove as a formless cloud with the wind. Deepest of all in her personality was the golden radiance that she diffused around her.	the most ordinary tasks

Deepest of all in her personality was the golden radiance that she diffused around her.	She could do the most prosy things (though she was wise enough never to stultify herself with such “household arts” as knitting and embroidery), yet immediately afterward pick up a book and let her imagination rove as a formless cloud with the wind. Deepest of all in her personality was the golden radiance that she diffused around her. As an open fire in a dark room throws romance and pathos into the quiet faces at its edge, so she cast her lights and shadows around the rooms that held her, until she made of her prosy old uncle a man of quaint and meditative charm, metamorphosed the stray telegraph boy into a Puck-like creature of delightful originality.	The most profound thing about her was the warm, shining quality she shared with everyone.

the golden radiance	She could do the most prosy things (though she was wise enough never to stultify herself with such “household arts” as knitting and embroidery), yet immediately afterward pick up a book and let her imagination rove as a formless cloud with the wind. Deepest of all in her personality was the golden radiance that she diffused around her. As an open fire in a dark room throws romance and pathos into the quiet faces at its edge, so she cast her lights and shadows around the rooms that held her, until she made of her prosy old uncle a man of quaint and meditative charm, metamorphosed the stray telegraph boy into a Puck-like creature of delightful originality.	her golden warmth

quaint and meditative charm	Deepest of all in her personality was the golden radiance that she diffused around her. As an open fire in a dark room throws romance and pathos into the quiet faces at its edge, so she cast her lights and shadows around the rooms that held her, until she made of her prosy old uncle a man of quaint and meditative charm, metamorphosed the stray telegraph boy into a Puck-like creature of delightful originality. At first this quality of hers somehow irritated Amory.	charming and thoughtful

delightful originality	Deepest of all in her personality was the golden radiance that she diffused around her. As an open fire in a dark room throws romance and pathos into the quiet faces at its edge, so she cast her lights and shadows around the rooms that held her, until she made of her prosy old uncle a man of quaint and meditative charm, metamorphosed the stray telegraph boy into a Puck-like creature of delightful originality. At first this quality of hers somehow irritated Amory.	delightful creativity

her prosy old uncle	Deepest of all in her personality was the golden radiance that she diffused around her. As an open fire in a dark room throws romance and pathos into the quiet faces at its edge, so she cast her lights and shadows around the rooms that held her, until she made of her prosy old uncle a man of quaint and meditative charm, metamorphosed the stray telegraph boy into a Puck-like creature of delightful originality. At first this quality of hers somehow irritated Amory.	her boring old uncle

the stray telegraph boy	Deepest of all in her personality was the golden radiance that she diffused around her. As an open fire in a dark room throws romance and pathos into the quiet faces at its edge, so she cast her lights and shadows around the rooms that held her, until she made of her prosy old uncle a man of quaint and meditative charm, metamorphosed the stray telegraph boy into a Puck-like creature of delightful originality. At first this quality of hers somehow irritated Amory.	the random telegraph boy

uncle a man of quaint and meditative charm, metamorphosed the stray telegraph boy into a Puck-like creature of delightful originality.	Deepest of all in her personality was the golden radiance that she diffused around her. As an open fire in a dark room throws romance and pathos into the quiet faces at its edge, so she cast her lights and shadows around the rooms that held her, until she made of her prosy old uncle a man of quaint and meditative charm, metamorphosed the stray telegraph boy into a Puck-like creature of delightful originality. At first this quality of hers somehow irritated Amory.	her uncle into a charming and thoughtful man, and changed the wandering telegraph boy into a playful and original person.

a Puck-like creature	Deepest of all in her personality was the golden radiance that she diffused around her. As an open fire in a dark room throws romance and pathos into the quiet faces at its edge, so she cast her lights and shadows around the rooms that held her, until she made of her prosy old uncle a man of quaint and meditative charm, metamorphosed the stray telegraph boy into a Puck-like creature of delightful originality. At first this quality of hers somehow irritated Amory.	A mischievous creature like Puck

irritated Amory.	As an open fire in a dark room throws romance and pathos into the quiet faces at its edge, so she cast her lights and shadows around the rooms that held her, until she made of her prosy old uncle a man of quaint and meditative charm, metamorphosed the stray telegraph boy into a Puck-like creature of delightful originality. At first this quality of hers somehow irritated Amory. He considered his own uniqueness sufficient, and it rather embarrassed him when she tried to read new interests into him for the benefit of what other adorers were present.	Amory was annoyed.

other adorers	At first this quality of hers somehow irritated Amory. He considered his own uniqueness sufficient, and it rather embarrassed him when she tried to read new interests into him for the benefit of what other adorers were present. He felt as if a polite but insistent stage-manager were attempting to make him give a new interpretation of a part he had conned for years.	other admirers

read new interests into him for the benefit of what other adorers were present.	At first this quality of hers somehow irritated Amory. He considered his own uniqueness sufficient, and it rather embarrassed him when she tried to read new interests into him for the benefit of what other adorers were present. He felt as if a polite but insistent stage-manager were attempting to make him give a new interpretation of a part he had conned for years.	try to make him seem interested in new things to impress the people who liked her.

his own uniqueness	At first this quality of hers somehow irritated Amory. He considered his own uniqueness sufficient, and it rather embarrassed him when she tried to read new interests into him for the benefit of what other adorers were present. He felt as if a polite but insistent stage-manager were attempting to make him give a new interpretation of a part he had conned for years.	his own specialness

a polite but insistent stage-manager	He considered his own uniqueness sufficient, and it rather embarrassed him when she tried to read new interests into him for the benefit of what other adorers were present. He felt as if a polite but insistent stage-manager were attempting to make him give a new interpretation of a part he had conned for years. But Clara talking, Clara telling a slender tale of a hatpin and an inebriated man and herself.	a polite but pushy director

attempting to make him give a new interpretation of a part he had conned for years.	He considered his own uniqueness sufficient, and it rather embarrassed him when she tried to read new interests into him for the benefit of what other adorers were present. He felt as if a polite but insistent stage-manager were attempting to make him give a new interpretation of a part he had conned for years. But Clara talking, Clara telling a slender tale of a hatpin and an inebriated man and herself.	trying to get him to act differently in a role he'd known for a long time.

a slender tale	He felt as if a polite but insistent stage-manager were attempting to make him give a new interpretation of a part he had conned for years. But Clara talking, Clara telling a slender tale of a hatpin and an inebriated man and herself. People tried afterward to repeat her anecdotes but for the life of them they could make them sound like nothing whatever.	a short story

tale of a hatpin and an inebriated man and herself.	He felt as if a polite but insistent stage-manager were attempting to make him give a new interpretation of a part he had conned for years. But Clara talking, Clara telling a slender tale of a hatpin and an inebriated man and herself. People tried afterward to repeat her anecdotes but for the life of them they could make them sound like nothing whatever.	A story about a hatpin, a drunk man, and herself.

an inebriated man	He felt as if a polite but insistent stage-manager were attempting to make him give a new interpretation of a part he had conned for years. But Clara talking, Clara telling a slender tale of a hatpin and an inebriated man and herself. People tried afterward to repeat her anecdotes but for the life of them they could make them sound like nothing whatever.	a drunk man

smiles many of them had smiled for long; there were few tears in Clara, but people smiled misty-eyed at her.	People tried afterward to repeat her anecdotes but for the life of them they could make them sound like nothing whatever. They gave her a sort of innocent attention and the best smiles many of them had smiled for long; there were few tears in Clara, but people smiled misty-eyed at her. Very occasionally Amory stayed for little half-hours after the rest of the court had gone, and they would have bread and jam and tea late in the afternoon or “maple-sugar lunches,” as she called them, at night.	They hadn't smiled that way in a long time; Clara rarely cried, but people looked at her with misty eyes and smiled.

gone, and they would have bread and jam and tea late in the afternoon or “maple-sugar lunches,” as she called them, at night.	They gave her a sort of innocent attention and the best smiles many of them had smiled for long; there were few tears in Clara, but people smiled misty-eyed at her. Very occasionally Amory stayed for little half-hours after the rest of the court had gone, and they would have bread and jam and tea late in the afternoon or “maple-sugar lunches,” as she called them, at night. “You are remarkable, aren’t you!”	gone, and they would have bread and jam and tea late in the afternoon or "maple-sugar lunches," as she called them, at night.

centre of the dining-room table one six o’clock.	“You are remarkable, aren’t you!” Amory was becoming trite from where he perched in the centre of the dining-room table one six o’clock. “Not a bit,” she answered.	in the middle of the dining room table at six o'clock.

napkins in the sideboard.	“Not a bit,” she answered. She was searching out napkins in the sideboard. “I’m really most humdrum and commonplace.	Napkins in the sideboard.

One of those people who have no interest in anything but their children.”	“I’m really most humdrum and commonplace. One of those people who have no interest in anything but their children.” “Tell that to somebody else,” scoffed Amory.	Someone who only cares about their kids.

Tell that to somebody else,” scoffed Amory.	One of those people who have no interest in anything but their children.” “Tell that to somebody else,” scoffed Amory. “You know you’re perfectly effulgent.”	Tell that to someone else," Amory scoffed.

thing that he knew might embarrass her.	“You know you’re perfectly effulgent.” He asked her the one thing that he knew might embarrass her. It was the remark that the first bore made to Adam.	the thing he knew could embarrass her.

told Amory much about herself that evening.	But eventually Adam probably told the bore all the things he thought about at night when the locusts sang in the sandy grass, and he must have remarked patronizingly how different he was from Eve, forgetting how different she was from him. at any rate, Clara told Amory much about herself that evening. She had had a harried life from sixteen on, and her education had stopped sharply with her leisure.	told Amory a lot about herself that evening.

stopped sharply with her leisure.	at any rate, Clara told Amory much about herself that evening. She had had a harried life from sixteen on, and her education had stopped sharply with her leisure. Browsing in her library, Amory found a tattered gray book out of which fell a yellow sheet that he impudently opened.	ended abruptly when she had free time.

a tattered gray book	She had had a harried life from sixteen on, and her education had stopped sharply with her leisure. Browsing in her library, Amory found a tattered gray book out of which fell a yellow sheet that he impudently opened. It was a poem that she had written at school about a gray convent wall on a gray day, and a girl with her cloak blown by the wind sitting atop of it and thinking about the many-colored world.	A torn, gray book

found a tattered gray book out of which fell a yellow sheet that he impudently opened.	She had had a harried life from sixteen on, and her education had stopped sharply with her leisure. Browsing in her library, Amory found a tattered gray book out of which fell a yellow sheet that he impudently opened. It was a poem that she had written at school about a gray convent wall on a gray day, and a girl with her cloak blown by the wind sitting atop of it and thinking about the many-colored world.	found a ripped gray book, and a yellow paper fell out; he opened it without permission.

a gray convent wall	Browsing in her library, Amory found a tattered gray book out of which fell a yellow sheet that he impudently opened. It was a poem that she had written at school about a gray convent wall on a gray day, and a girl with her cloak blown by the wind sitting atop of it and thinking about the many-colored world. As a rule such sentiment bored him, but this was done with so much simplicity and atmosphere, that it brought a picture of Clara to his mind, of Clara on such a cool, gray day with her keen blue eyes staring out, trying to see her tragedies come marching over the gardens outside.	a gray convent wall

written at school about a gray convent wall on a gray day, and a girl with her cloak blown by the wind sitting atop of it and thinking about the many-colored world.	Browsing in her library, Amory found a tattered gray book out of which fell a yellow sheet that he impudently opened. It was a poem that she had written at school about a gray convent wall on a gray day, and a girl with her cloak blown by the wind sitting atop of it and thinking about the many-colored world. As a rule such sentiment bored him, but this was done with so much simplicity and atmosphere, that it brought a picture of Clara to his mind, of Clara on such a cool, gray day with her keen blue eyes staring out, trying to see her tragedies come marching over the gardens outside.	written in school about a gray convent wall on a gray day, and a girl with her cloak blowing in the wind, sitting on top of it and thinking about the colorful world.

bored him, but this was done with so much simplicity and atmosphere, that it brought a picture of Clara to his mind, of Clara on such a cool, gray day with her keen blue eyes staring out, trying to see her tragedies come marching over the gardens outside.	It was a poem that she had written at school about a gray convent wall on a gray day, and a girl with her cloak blown by the wind sitting atop of it and thinking about the many-colored world. As a rule such sentiment bored him, but this was done with so much simplicity and atmosphere, that it brought a picture of Clara to his mind, of Clara on such a cool, gray day with her keen blue eyes staring out, trying to see her tragedies come marching over the gardens outside. He envied that poem.	bored him, but it was written so simply and evoked such a strong feeling that he pictured Clara in his mind, Clara on a cool, gray day with her sharp blue eyes looking out, as if she was trying to imagine her troubles happening in the gardens.

so much simplicity	It was a poem that she had written at school about a gray convent wall on a gray day, and a girl with her cloak blown by the wind sitting atop of it and thinking about the many-colored world. As a rule such sentiment bored him, but this was done with so much simplicity and atmosphere, that it brought a picture of Clara to his mind, of Clara on such a cool, gray day with her keen blue eyes staring out, trying to see her tragedies come marching over the gardens outside. He envied that poem.	such simplicity

such a cool, gray day	It was a poem that she had written at school about a gray convent wall on a gray day, and a girl with her cloak blown by the wind sitting atop of it and thinking about the many-colored world. As a rule such sentiment bored him, but this was done with so much simplicity and atmosphere, that it brought a picture of Clara to his mind, of Clara on such a cool, gray day with her keen blue eyes staring out, trying to see her tragedies come marching over the gardens outside. He envied that poem.	Such a cool, gray day

such sentiment	It was a poem that she had written at school about a gray convent wall on a gray day, and a girl with her cloak blown by the wind sitting atop of it and thinking about the many-colored world. As a rule such sentiment bored him, but this was done with so much simplicity and atmosphere, that it brought a picture of Clara to his mind, of Clara on such a cool, gray day with her keen blue eyes staring out, trying to see her tragedies come marching over the gardens outside. He envied that poem.	That kind of feeling

perched above him in the air.	He envied that poem. How he would have loved to have come along and seen her on the wall and talked nonsense or romance to her, perched above him in the air. He began to be frightfully jealous of everything about Clara: of her past, of her babies, of the men and women who flocked to drink deep of her cool kindness and rest their tired minds as at an absorbing play.	sitting above him in the air.

an absorbing play	How he would have loved to have come along and seen her on the wall and talked nonsense or romance to her, perched above him in the air. He began to be frightfully jealous of everything about Clara: of her past, of her babies, of the men and women who flocked to drink deep of her cool kindness and rest their tired minds as at an absorbing play. “Nobody seems to bore you,” he objected.	a captivating show

her cool kindness	How he would have loved to have come along and seen her on the wall and talked nonsense or romance to her, perched above him in the air. He began to be frightfully jealous of everything about Clara: of her past, of her babies, of the men and women who flocked to drink deep of her cool kindness and rest their tired minds as at an absorbing play. “Nobody seems to bore you,” he objected.	Her kind and gentle nature.

deep of her cool kindness and rest their tired minds as at an absorbing play.	How he would have loved to have come along and seen her on the wall and talked nonsense or romance to her, perched above him in the air. He began to be frightfully jealous of everything about Clara: of her past, of her babies, of the men and women who flocked to drink deep of her cool kindness and rest their tired minds as at an absorbing play. “Nobody seems to bore you,” he objected.	drink deeply from her cool kindness and relax their tired minds as if at a fascinating show.

turned to find something in Browning that bore on the subject.	“About half the world do,” she admitted, “but I think that’s a pretty good average, don’t you?” and she turned to find something in Browning that bore on the subject. She was the only person he ever met who could look up passages and quotations to show him in the middle of the conversation, and yet not be irritating to distraction.	looked for a relevant quote in Browning.

person he ever met who could look up passages and quotations to show him in the middle of the conversation, and yet not be irritating to distraction.	and she turned to find something in Browning that bore on the subject. She was the only person he ever met who could look up passages and quotations to show him in the middle of the conversation, and yet not be irritating to distraction. She did it constantly, with such a serious enthusiasm that he grew fond of watching her golden hair bent over a book, brow wrinkled ever so little at hunting her sentence.	The only person he ever met who could find quotes and passages to show him during a conversation without being incredibly annoying.

such a serious enthusiasm	She was the only person he ever met who could look up passages and quotations to show him in the middle of the conversation, and yet not be irritating to distraction. She did it constantly, with such a serious enthusiasm that he grew fond of watching her golden hair bent over a book, brow wrinkled ever so little at hunting her sentence. Through early March he took to going to Philadelphia for weekends.	that she was so enthusiastic

enthusiasm that he grew fond of watching her golden hair bent over a book, brow wrinkled ever so little at hunting her sentence.	She was the only person he ever met who could look up passages and quotations to show him in the middle of the conversation, and yet not be irritating to distraction. She did it constantly, with such a serious enthusiasm that he grew fond of watching her golden hair bent over a book, brow wrinkled ever so little at hunting her sentence. Through early March he took to going to Philadelphia for weekends.	She was so enthusiastic that he loved watching her golden hair as she leaned over a book, her forehead slightly wrinkled while she looked for her sentence.

word from her would have given him another delicious half-hour of adoration.	Through early March he took to going to Philadelphia for weekends. Almost always there was someone else there and she seemed not anxious to see him alone, for many occasions presented themselves when a word from her would have given him another delicious half-hour of adoration. But he fell gradually in love and began to speculate wildly on marriage.	If she had said something, he could have enjoyed her company for another half hour.

fell gradually in love and began to speculate wildly on marriage.	Almost always there was someone else there and she seemed not anxious to see him alone, for many occasions presented themselves when a word from her would have given him another delicious half-hour of adoration. But he fell gradually in love and began to speculate wildly on marriage. Though this design flowed through his brain even to his lips, still he knew afterward that the desire had not been deeply rooted.	He slowly fell in love and started to fantasize wildly about getting married.

knew afterward that the desire had not been deeply rooted.	But he fell gradually in love and began to speculate wildly on marriage. Though this design flowed through his brain even to his lips, still he knew afterward that the desire had not been deeply rooted. Once he dreamt that it had come true and woke up in a cold panic, for in his dream she had been a silly, flaxen Clara, with the gold gone out of her hair and platitudes falling insipidly from her changeling tongue.	realized later that he hadn't truly wanted it.

been a silly, flaxen Clara, with the gold gone out of her hair and platitudes falling insipidly from her changeling tongue.	Though this design flowed through his brain even to his lips, still he knew afterward that the desire had not been deeply rooted. Once he dreamt that it had come true and woke up in a cold panic, for in his dream she had been a silly, flaxen Clara, with the gold gone out of her hair and platitudes falling insipidly from her changeling tongue. But she was the first fine woman he ever knew and one of the few good people who ever interested him.	been a foolish, pale-haired Clara, with her hair no longer golden, and with boring clichés coming from her altered way of speaking.

a silly, flaxen Clara	Though this design flowed through his brain even to his lips, still he knew afterward that the desire had not been deeply rooted. Once he dreamt that it had come true and woke up in a cold panic, for in his dream she had been a silly, flaxen Clara, with the gold gone out of her hair and platitudes falling insipidly from her changeling tongue. But she was the first fine woman he ever knew and one of the few good people who ever interested him.	a silly, blonde Clara

her changeling tongue	Though this design flowed through his brain even to his lips, still he knew afterward that the desire had not been deeply rooted. Once he dreamt that it had come true and woke up in a cold panic, for in his dream she had been a silly, flaxen Clara, with the gold gone out of her hair and platitudes falling insipidly from her changeling tongue. But she was the first fine woman he ever knew and one of the few good people who ever interested him.	her inconsistent speech

people who ever interested him.	Once he dreamt that it had come true and woke up in a cold panic, for in his dream she had been a silly, flaxen Clara, with the gold gone out of her hair and platitudes falling insipidly from her changeling tongue. But she was the first fine woman he ever knew and one of the few good people who ever interested him. She made her goodness such an asset.	people who he found interesting.

goodness such an asset.	But she was the first fine woman he ever knew and one of the few good people who ever interested him. She made her goodness such an asset. Amory had decided that most good people either dragged theirs after them as a liability, or else distorted it to artificial geniality, and of course there were the ever-present prig and Pharisee—(but Amory never included them as being among the saved).	Her goodness was a strength.

included them as being among the saved).	She made her goodness such an asset. Amory had decided that most good people either dragged theirs after them as a liability, or else distorted it to artificial geniality, and of course there were the ever-present prig and Pharisee—(but Amory never included them as being among the saved).	considered them to be among the good people).

artificial geniality	She made her goodness such an asset. Amory had decided that most good people either dragged theirs after them as a liability, or else distorted it to artificial geniality, and of course there were the ever-present prig and Pharisee—(but Amory never included them as being among the saved).	Fake friendliness

the ever-present prig	She made her goodness such an asset. Amory had decided that most good people either dragged theirs after them as a liability, or else distorted it to artificial geniality, and of course there were the ever-present prig and Pharisee—(but Amory never included them as being among the saved).	The always present self-righteous person.

her molten, beaten hair	“Over her gray and velvet dress, Under her molten, beaten hair, Color of rose in mock distress Flushes and fades and makes her fair; Fills the air from her to him With light and languor and little sighs, Just so subtly he scarcely knows. Laughing lightning, color of rose.”	Her wavy, shiny hair

her gray and velvet dress	“Over her gray and velvet dress, Under her molten, beaten hair, Color of rose in mock distress Flushes and fades and makes her fair; Fills the air from her to him With light and languor and little sighs, Just so subtly he scarcely knows. Laughing lightning, color of rose.”	Her gray and velvet dress.

Fills the air from her to him With light and languor and little sighs, Just so subtly he scarcely knows.	“Over her gray and velvet dress, Under her molten, beaten hair, Color of rose in mock distress Flushes and fades and makes her fair; Fills the air from her to him With light and languor and little sighs, Just so subtly he scarcely knows. Laughing lightning, color of rose.”	Light, laziness, and small sighs fill the space between them, so subtly that he barely notices.

little sighs	“Over her gray and velvet dress, Under her molten, beaten hair, Color of rose in mock distress Flushes and fades and makes her fair; Fills the air from her to him With light and languor and little sighs, Just so subtly he scarcely knows. Laughing lightning, color of rose.”	Soft sighs

mock distress Flushes	“Over her gray and velvet dress, Under her molten, beaten hair, Color of rose in mock distress Flushes and fades and makes her fair; Fills the air from her to him With light and languor and little sighs, Just so subtly he scarcely knows. Laughing lightning, color of rose.”	False sadness appears as blushes.

spontaneous in each of us—or were originally.”	“Well, we have some qualities in common. Things that are spontaneous in each of us—or were originally.” “You’re implying that I haven’t used myself very well?”	spontaneous in each of us, or used to be.

has to go through a lot more, and I’ve been sheltered.”	“Well, I can’t judge. A man, of course, has to go through a lot more, and I’ve been sheltered.” “Oh, don’t stall, please, Clara,” Amory interrupted; “but do talk about me a little, won’t you?”	has to experience a lot more, and I've been protected.

n’t you?”	A man, of course, has to go through a lot more, and I’ve been sheltered.” “Oh, don’t stall, please, Clara,” Amory interrupted; “but do talk about me a little, won’t you?” “Surely, I’d adore to.”	Won't you?

adore to.”	“Oh, don’t stall, please, Clara,” Amory interrupted; “but do talk about me a little, won’t you?” “Surely, I’d adore to.” She didn’t smile.	I'd love to.

people who notice its preponderance.”	Am I painfully conceited?” “Well—no, you have tremendous vanity, but it’ll amuse the people who notice its preponderance.” “I see.”	people who see a lot of it.

tremendous vanity	Am I painfully conceited?” “Well—no, you have tremendous vanity, but it’ll amuse the people who notice its preponderance.” “I see.”	Huge ego

humble at heart.	“I see.” “You’re really humble at heart. You sink to the third hell of depression when you think you’ve been slighted.	You're truly humble.

sink to the third hell of depression when you think you’ve been slighted.	“You’re really humble at heart. You sink to the third hell of depression when you think you’ve been slighted. In fact, you haven’t much self-respect.”	Get really depressed when you feel insulted.

judge a man while he’s talking.	You never let me say a word.” “Of course not—I can never judge a man while he’s talking. But I’m not through; the reason you have so little real self-confidence, even though you gravely announce to the occasional philistine that you think you’re a genius, is that you’ve attributed all sorts of atrocious faults to yourself and are trying to live up to them.	Judge someone while they're speaking.

atrocious faults	“Of course not—I can never judge a man while he’s talking. But I’m not through; the reason you have so little real self-confidence, even though you gravely announce to the occasional philistine that you think you’re a genius, is that you’ve attributed all sorts of atrocious faults to yourself and are trying to live up to them. For instance, you’re always saying that you are a slave to highballs.”	Terrible flaws

the occasional philistine	“Of course not—I can never judge a man while he’s talking. But I’m not through; the reason you have so little real self-confidence, even though you gravely announce to the occasional philistine that you think you’re a genius, is that you’ve attributed all sorts of atrocious faults to yourself and are trying to live up to them. For instance, you’re always saying that you are a slave to highballs.”	the occasional person who isn't interested in the arts

attributed all sorts of atrocious faults to yourself and are trying to live up to them.	“Of course not—I can never judge a man while he’s talking. But I’m not through; the reason you have so little real self-confidence, even though you gravely announce to the occasional philistine that you think you’re a genius, is that you’ve attributed all sorts of atrocious faults to yourself and are trying to live up to them. For instance, you’re always saying that you are a slave to highballs.”	You've decided you have terrible faults and you're trying to act like you do.

saying that you are a slave to highballs.”	But I’m not through; the reason you have so little real self-confidence, even though you gravely announce to the occasional philistine that you think you’re a genius, is that you’ve attributed all sorts of atrocious faults to yourself and are trying to live up to them. For instance, you’re always saying that you are a slave to highballs.” “But I am, potentially.”	You say you're addicted to highballs."

character, that you’ve no will.”	“But I am, potentially.” “And you say you’re a weak character, that you’ve no will.” “Not a bit of will—I’m a slave to my emotions, to my likes, to my hatred of boredom, to most of my desires—” “You are not!”	that you have no willpower.

most of my desires—” “You are not!”	“And you say you’re a weak character, that you’ve no will.” “Not a bit of will—I’m a slave to my emotions, to my likes, to my hatred of boredom, to most of my desires—” “You are not!” She brought one little fist down onto the other.	most of what I want—” “You are not!”

a bound helpless slave	She brought one little fist down onto the other. “You’re a slave, a bound helpless slave to one thing in the world, your imagination.” “You certainly interest me.	a completely helpless slave

slave, a bound helpless slave to one thing in the world, your imagination.”	She brought one little fist down onto the other. “You’re a slave, a bound helpless slave to one thing in the world, your imagination.” “You certainly interest me.	You are a slave, a helpless slave tied to one thing in the world: your imagination.

stay over an extra day from college you go about it in a sure way.	If this isn’t boring you, go on.” “I notice that when you want to stay over an extra day from college you go about it in a sure way. You never decide at first while the merits of going or staying are fairly clear in your mind.	You have a reliable method for staying an extra day at college.

merits of going or staying are fairly clear in your mind.	“I notice that when you want to stay over an extra day from college you go about it in a sure way. You never decide at first while the merits of going or staying are fairly clear in your mind. You let your imagination shinny on the side of your desires for a few hours, and then you decide.	The reasons for going or staying are pretty obvious to you.

shinny on the side of your desires for a few hours, and then you decide.	You never decide at first while the merits of going or staying are fairly clear in your mind. You let your imagination shinny on the side of your desires for a few hours, and then you decide. Naturally your imagination, after a little freedom, thinks up a million reasons why you should stay, so your decision when it comes isn’t true.	Focus on what you want for a little while, and then you decide.

thinks up a million reasons why you should stay, so your decision when it comes isn’t true.	You let your imagination shinny on the side of your desires for a few hours, and then you decide. Naturally your imagination, after a little freedom, thinks up a million reasons why you should stay, so your decision when it comes isn’t true. It’s biased.”	comes up with a lot of reasons to stay, so your decision isn't honest.

shinny on the wrong side?”	It’s biased.” “Yes,” objected Amory, “but isn’t it lack of willpower to let my imagination shinny on the wrong side?” “My dear boy, there’s your big mistake.	Climb to the wrong side?

judgment—the judgment to decide at once when you know your imagination will play you false, given half a chance.”	“My dear boy, there’s your big mistake. This has nothing to do with willpower; that’s a crazy, useless word, anyway; you lack judgment—the judgment to decide at once when you know your imagination will play you false, given half a chance.” “Well, I’ll be darned!”	The ability to make a good decision immediately when you know your imagination will trick you if you get the chance.

a crazy, useless word	“My dear boy, there’s your big mistake. This has nothing to do with willpower; that’s a crazy, useless word, anyway; you lack judgment—the judgment to decide at once when you know your imagination will play you false, given half a chance.” “Well, I’ll be darned!”	A crazy, useless word.

exclaimed Amory in surprise, “that’s the last thing I expected.”	“Well, I’ll be darned!” exclaimed Amory in surprise, “that’s the last thing I expected.” Clara didn’t gloat.	Amory said in surprise, “That’s the last thing I expected.”

changing the books once a week.	But she had started him thinking and he believed she was partly right. He felt like a factory-owner who after accusing a clerk of dishonesty finds that his own son, in the office, is changing the books once a week. His poor, mistreated will that he had been holding up to the scorn of himself and his friends, stood before him innocent, and his judgment walked off to prison with the unconfinable imp, imagination, dancing in mocking glee beside him.	altering the financial records every week.

walked off to prison with the unconfinable imp, imagination, dancing in mocking glee beside him.	He felt like a factory-owner who after accusing a clerk of dishonesty finds that his own son, in the office, is changing the books once a week. His poor, mistreated will that he had been holding up to the scorn of himself and his friends, stood before him innocent, and his judgment walked off to prison with the unconfinable imp, imagination, dancing in mocking glee beside him. Clara’s was the only advice he ever asked without dictating the answer himself—except, perhaps, in his talks with Monsignor Darcy.	went to prison with his wild imagination, which was happily mocking him.

the unconfinable imp, imagination	He felt like a factory-owner who after accusing a clerk of dishonesty finds that his own son, in the office, is changing the books once a week. His poor, mistreated will that he had been holding up to the scorn of himself and his friends, stood before him innocent, and his judgment walked off to prison with the unconfinable imp, imagination, dancing in mocking glee beside him. Clara’s was the only advice he ever asked without dictating the answer himself—except, perhaps, in his talks with Monsignor Darcy.	Imagination, which couldn't be controlled

asked without dictating the answer himself—except, perhaps, in his talks with Monsignor Darcy.	His poor, mistreated will that he had been holding up to the scorn of himself and his friends, stood before him innocent, and his judgment walked off to prison with the unconfinable imp, imagination, dancing in mocking glee beside him. Clara’s was the only advice he ever asked without dictating the answer himself—except, perhaps, in his talks with Monsignor Darcy. How he loved to do any sort of thing with Clara!	asked without telling himself what the answer should be—except, maybe, when he talked to Monsignor Darcy.

a rare, epicurean dream	How he loved to do any sort of thing with Clara! Shopping with her was a rare, epicurean dream. In every store where she had ever traded she was whispered about as the beautiful Mrs. Page.	a rare, delightful dream

Shopping with her was a rare, epicurean dream.	How he loved to do any sort of thing with Clara! Shopping with her was a rare, epicurean dream. In every store where she had ever traded she was whispered about as the beautiful Mrs. Page.	Shopping with her was a special, luxurious dream.

whispered about as the beautiful Mrs. Page.	Shopping with her was a rare, epicurean dream. In every store where she had ever traded she was whispered about as the beautiful Mrs. Page. “I’ll bet she won’t stay single long.”	People whispered about her, calling her the beautiful Mrs. Page.

the beautiful Mrs. Page	Shopping with her was a rare, epicurean dream. In every store where she had ever traded she was whispered about as the beautiful Mrs. Page. “I’ll bet she won’t stay single long.”	The beautiful Mrs. Page

ain’t lookin’ for no advice.”	“Well, don’t scream it out. She ain’t lookin’ for no advice.” “Ain’t she beautiful!”	isn't looking for any advice.

moves forward, smirking.	“Ain’t she beautiful!” Enter a floorwalker—silence till he moves forward, smirking. “Society person, ain’t she?”	He walks forward, smirking.

Gee! girls	“Yeah, but poor now, I guess; so they say.” “Gee! girls, ain’t she some kid!” And Clara beamed on all alike.	Wow! Girls

gave her discounts, sometimes to her knowledge and sometimes without it.	And Clara beamed on all alike. Amory believed that tradespeople gave her discounts, sometimes to her knowledge and sometimes without it. He knew she dressed very well, had always the best of everything in the house, and was inevitably waited upon by the head floorwalker at the very least.	gave her discounts, sometimes knowing about it and sometimes not.

waited upon by the head floorwalker at the very least.	Amory believed that tradespeople gave her discounts, sometimes to her knowledge and sometimes without it. He knew she dressed very well, had always the best of everything in the house, and was inevitably waited upon by the head floorwalker at the very least. Sometimes they would go to church together on Sunday and he would walk beside her and revel in her cheeks moist from the soft water in the new air.	She was at least served by the head floorwalker.

the head floorwalker	Amory believed that tradespeople gave her discounts, sometimes to her knowledge and sometimes without it. He knew she dressed very well, had always the best of everything in the house, and was inevitably waited upon by the head floorwalker at the very least. Sometimes they would go to church together on Sunday and he would walk beside her and revel in her cheeks moist from the soft water in the new air.	The manager

go to church together on Sunday and he would walk beside her and revel in her cheeks moist from the soft water in the new air.	He knew she dressed very well, had always the best of everything in the house, and was inevitably waited upon by the head floorwalker at the very least. Sometimes they would go to church together on Sunday and he would walk beside her and revel in her cheeks moist from the soft water in the new air. She was very devout, always had been, and God knows what heights she attained and what strength she drew down to herself when she knelt and bent her golden hair into the stained-glass light.	go to church together on Sunday and he would walk beside her and enjoy her cheeks that were wet from the fresh air.

the stained-glass light	Sometimes they would go to church together on Sunday and he would walk beside her and revel in her cheeks moist from the soft water in the new air. She was very devout, always had been, and God knows what heights she attained and what strength she drew down to herself when she knelt and bent her golden hair into the stained-glass light. “St. Cecelia,” he cried aloud one day, quite involuntarily, and the people turned and peered, and the priest paused in his sermon and Clara and Amory turned to fiery red.	the light from the stained glass

drew down to herself when she knelt and bent her golden hair into the stained-glass light.	Sometimes they would go to church together on Sunday and he would walk beside her and revel in her cheeks moist from the soft water in the new air. She was very devout, always had been, and God knows what heights she attained and what strength she drew down to herself when she knelt and bent her golden hair into the stained-glass light. “St. Cecelia,” he cried aloud one day, quite involuntarily, and the people turned and peered, and the priest paused in his sermon and Clara and Amory turned to fiery red.	she received when she knelt and put her golden hair in the light from the stained glass.

fiery red	She was very devout, always had been, and God knows what heights she attained and what strength she drew down to herself when she knelt and bent her golden hair into the stained-glass light. “St. Cecelia,” he cried aloud one day, quite involuntarily, and the people turned and peered, and the priest paused in his sermon and Clara and Amory turned to fiery red. That was the last Sunday they had, for he spoiled it all that night.	Blushing intensely

paused in his sermon and Clara and Amory turned to fiery red.	She was very devout, always had been, and God knows what heights she attained and what strength she drew down to herself when she knelt and bent her golden hair into the stained-glass light. “St. Cecelia,” he cried aloud one day, quite involuntarily, and the people turned and peered, and the priest paused in his sermon and Clara and Amory turned to fiery red. That was the last Sunday they had, for he spoiled it all that night.	stopped his sermon and Clara and Amory blushed furiously.

the March twilight	He couldn’t help it. They were walking through the March twilight where it was as warm as June, and the joy of youth filled his soul so that he felt he must speak. “I think,” he said and his voice trembled, “that if I lost faith in you I’d lose faith in God.”	The evening in March

looked at him with such a startled face that he asked her the matter.	“I think,” he said and his voice trembled, “that if I lost faith in you I’d lose faith in God.” She looked at him with such a startled face that he asked her the matter. “Nothing,” she said slowly, “only this: five men have said that to me before, and it frightens me.”	She looked at him, surprised, so he asked her what was wrong.

such a startled face	“I think,” he said and his voice trembled, “that if I lost faith in you I’d lose faith in God.” She looked at him with such a startled face that he asked her the matter. “Nothing,” she said slowly, “only this: five men have said that to me before, and it frightens me.”	She looked surprised.

said that to me before, and it frightens me.”	She looked at him with such a startled face that he asked her the matter. “Nothing,” she said slowly, “only this: five men have said that to me before, and it frightens me.” “Oh, Clara, is that your fate!”	said that to me before, and it scares me."

love to you is—” he began.	She did not answer. “I suppose love to you is—” he began. She turned like a flash.	love to you is—" he started to say.

almost the realization	She seemed suddenly a daughter of light alone. His entity dropped out of her plane and he longed only to touch her dress with almost the realization that Joseph must have had of Mary’s eternal significance. But quite mechanically he heard himself saying: “And I love you—any latent greatness that I’ve got is.	almost the understanding

touch her dress with almost the realization that Joseph must have had of Mary’s eternal significance.	She seemed suddenly a daughter of light alone. His entity dropped out of her plane and he longed only to touch her dress with almost the realization that Joseph must have had of Mary’s eternal significance. But quite mechanically he heard himself saying: “And I love you—any latent greatness that I’ve got is.	touch her dress with almost the understanding that Joseph must have had of Mary's everlasting importance.

Mary’s eternal significance	She seemed suddenly a daughter of light alone. His entity dropped out of her plane and he longed only to touch her dress with almost the realization that Joseph must have had of Mary’s eternal significance. But quite mechanically he heard himself saying: “And I love you—any latent greatness that I’ve got is.	Mary's lasting importance

greatness that I’ve got is.	His entity dropped out of her plane and he longed only to touch her dress with almost the realization that Joseph must have had of Mary’s eternal significance. But quite mechanically he heard himself saying: “And I love you—any latent greatness that I’ve got is. oh, I can’t talk, but Clara, if I come back in two years in a position to marry you—” She shook her head.	Any greatness I have.

any latent greatness	His entity dropped out of her plane and he longed only to touch her dress with almost the realization that Joseph must have had of Mary’s eternal significance. But quite mechanically he heard himself saying: “And I love you—any latent greatness that I’ve got is. oh, I can’t talk, but Clara, if I come back in two years in a position to marry you—” She shook her head.	any hidden talent

position to marry you—” She shook her head.	But quite mechanically he heard himself saying: “And I love you—any latent greatness that I’ve got is. oh, I can’t talk, but Clara, if I come back in two years in a position to marry you—” She shook her head. “No,” she said; “I’d never marry again.	...able to marry you—" She shook her head.

a clever man	I’ve got my two children and I want myself for them. I like you—I like all clever men, you more than any—but you know me well enough to know that I’d never marry a clever man—” She broke off suddenly. “Amory.”	A smart man

all clever men	I’ve got my two children and I want myself for them. I like you—I like all clever men, you more than any—but you know me well enough to know that I’d never marry a clever man—” She broke off suddenly. “Amory.”	All intelligent men.

more than any—but you know me well enough to know that I’d never marry a clever man—” She broke off suddenly.	I’ve got my two children and I want myself for them. I like you—I like all clever men, you more than any—but you know me well enough to know that I’d never marry a clever man—” She broke off suddenly. “Amory.”	more than anyone—but you know me well enough to know that I would never marry a clever man—” She stopped suddenly.

’re not in love with me.	“What?” “You’re not in love with me. You never wanted to marry me, did you?”	You're not in love with me.

speaking aloud.	“It was the twilight,” he said wonderingly. “I didn’t feel as though I were speaking aloud. But I love you—or adore you—or worship you—” “There you go—running through your catalogue of emotions in five seconds.”	Speaking out loud.

go—running through your catalogue of emotions in five seconds.”	“I didn’t feel as though I were speaking aloud. But I love you—or adore you—or worship you—” “There you go—running through your catalogue of emotions in five seconds.” He smiled unwillingly.	You're listing all your emotions in five seconds."

the fading dusk	“Don’t make me out such a lightweight, Clara; you are depressing sometimes.” “You’re not a lightweight, of all things,” she said intently, taking his arm and opening wide her eyes—he could see their kindliness in the fading dusk. “A lightweight is an eternal nay.”	the fading evening light

’re not a lightweight, of all things,” she said intently, taking his arm and opening wide her eyes—he could see their kindliness in the fading dusk.	“Don’t make me out such a lightweight, Clara; you are depressing sometimes.” “You’re not a lightweight, of all things,” she said intently, taking his arm and opening wide her eyes—he could see their kindliness in the fading dusk. “A lightweight is an eternal nay.”	"You're definitely not a lightweight," she said seriously, taking his arm and widening her eyes—he could see their kindness in the fading dusk.

an eternal nay	“You’re not a lightweight, of all things,” she said intently, taking his arm and opening wide her eyes—he could see their kindliness in the fading dusk. “A lightweight is an eternal nay.” “There’s so much spring in the air—there’s so much lazy sweetness in your heart.”	a constant no

spring in the air—there’s so much lazy sweetness in your heart.”	“A lightweight is an eternal nay.” “There’s so much spring in the air—there’s so much lazy sweetness in your heart.” She dropped his arm.	There's so much joy in the air—there's so much relaxed pleasure in your heart.

so much lazy sweetness	“A lightweight is an eternal nay.” “There’s so much spring in the air—there’s so much lazy sweetness in your heart.” She dropped his arm.	So much lazy sweetness.

pale-blue twilight	Well, I do, about once a month.” And then that wonderful girl and Amory raced to the corner like two mad children gone wild with pale-blue twilight. “I’m going to the country for tomorrow,” she announced, as she stood panting, safe beyond the flare of the corner lamppost.	Pale blue twilight

gone wild with pale-blue twilight.	Well, I do, about once a month.” And then that wonderful girl and Amory raced to the corner like two mad children gone wild with pale-blue twilight. “I’m going to the country for tomorrow,” she announced, as she stood panting, safe beyond the flare of the corner lamppost.	acting crazy in the dim light of the evening

flare of the corner lamppost.	And then that wonderful girl and Amory raced to the corner like two mad children gone wild with pale-blue twilight. “I’m going to the country for tomorrow,” she announced, as she stood panting, safe beyond the flare of the corner lamppost. “These days are too magnificent to miss, though perhaps I feel them more in the city.”	light from the street lamp

the corner lamppost	And then that wonderful girl and Amory raced to the corner like two mad children gone wild with pale-blue twilight. “I’m going to the country for tomorrow,” she announced, as she stood panting, safe beyond the flare of the corner lamppost. “These days are too magnificent to miss, though perhaps I feel them more in the city.”	The lamppost at the corner.

bent your soul a little the other way!”	“Oh, Clara!” Amory said; “what a devil you could have been if the Lord had just bent your soul a little the other way!” “Maybe,” she answered; “but I think not.	twisted your soul a little differently!

That little outburst	I’m never really wild and never have been. That little outburst was pure spring.” “And you are, too,” said he.	That little outburst

person of your own self-reputed brains be so constantly wrong about me?	They were walking along now. “No—you’re wrong again, how can a person of your own self-reputed brains be so constantly wrong about me? I’m the opposite of everything spring ever stood for.	How can someone as smart as you always be wrong about me?

your own self-reputed brains	They were walking along now. “No—you’re wrong again, how can a person of your own self-reputed brains be so constantly wrong about me? I’m the opposite of everything spring ever stood for.	You, who think you're smart

look like what pleased some soppy old Greek sculptor, but I assure you that if it weren’t for my face I’d be a quiet nun in the convent without”—then	I’m the opposite of everything spring ever stood for. It’s unfortunate, if I happen to look like what pleased some soppy old Greek sculptor, but I assure you that if it weren’t for my face I’d be a quiet nun in the convent without”—then she broke into a run and her raised voice floated back to him as he followed—“my precious babies, which I must go back and see.”	look like what pleased some sentimental old Greek sculptor, but I promise you that if it weren’t for my face I’d be a quiet nun in the convent without”—then

a quiet nun	I’m the opposite of everything spring ever stood for. It’s unfortunate, if I happen to look like what pleased some soppy old Greek sculptor, but I assure you that if it weren’t for my face I’d be a quiet nun in the convent without”—then she broke into a run and her raised voice floated back to him as he followed—“my precious babies, which I must go back and see.”	A quiet nun

some soppy old Greek sculptor	I’m the opposite of everything spring ever stood for. It’s unfortunate, if I happen to look like what pleased some soppy old Greek sculptor, but I assure you that if it weren’t for my face I’d be a quiet nun in the convent without”—then she broke into a run and her raised voice floated back to him as he followed—“my precious babies, which I must go back and see.”	some sentimental old Greek sculptor

broke into a run and her raised voice floated back to him as he followed—“my precious babies, which I must go back and see.”	It’s unfortunate, if I happen to look like what pleased some soppy old Greek sculptor, but I assure you that if it weren’t for my face I’d be a quiet nun in the convent without”—then she broke into a run and her raised voice floated back to him as he followed—“my precious babies, which I must go back and see.” She was the only girl he ever knew with whom he could understand how another man might be preferred.	She started running, and he heard her shouting back, "My precious babies, I have to go see them."

understand how another man might be preferred.	she broke into a run and her raised voice floated back to him as he followed—“my precious babies, which I must go back and see.” She was the only girl he ever knew with whom he could understand how another man might be preferred. Often Amory met wives whom he had known as debutantes, and looking intently at them imagined that he found something in their faces which said: “Oh, if I could only have gotten you!”	understand why another man might be chosen.

wives whom he had known as debutantes, and looking intently at them imagined that he found something in their faces which said: “Oh, if I could only have gotten you!”	She was the only girl he ever knew with whom he could understand how another man might be preferred. Often Amory met wives whom he had known as debutantes, and looking intently at them imagined that he found something in their faces which said: “Oh, if I could only have gotten you!” Oh, the enormous conceit of the man!	wives he had known as young women, and looking closely at them, he imagined that he saw something in their faces that said: "Oh, if only I could have had you!"

Oh, the enormous conceit	Often Amory met wives whom he had known as debutantes, and looking intently at them imagined that he found something in their faces which said: “Oh, if I could only have gotten you!” Oh, the enormous conceit of the man! But that night seemed a night of stars and singing and Clara’s bright soul still gleamed on the ways they had trod.	Oh, the huge ego

conceit of the man!	Often Amory met wives whom he had known as debutantes, and looking intently at them imagined that he found something in their faces which said: “Oh, if I could only have gotten you!” Oh, the enormous conceit of the man! But that night seemed a night of stars and singing and Clara’s bright soul still gleamed on the ways they had trod.	The man's arrogance!

Clara’s bright soul	Oh, the enormous conceit of the man! But that night seemed a night of stars and singing and Clara’s bright soul still gleamed on the ways they had trod. “Golden, golden is the air—” he chanted to the little pools of water.	Clara's happy spirit

gleamed on the ways they had trod.	Oh, the enormous conceit of the man! But that night seemed a night of stars and singing and Clara’s bright soul still gleamed on the ways they had trod. “Golden, golden is the air—” he chanted to the little pools of water.	Shone on the paths they had walked.

chanted to the little pools of water.	But that night seemed a night of stars and singing and Clara’s bright soul still gleamed on the ways they had trod. “Golden, golden is the air—” he chanted to the little pools of water. “Golden is the air, golden notes from golden mandolins, golden frets of golden violins, fair, oh, wearily fair.	He sang to the small puddles.

golden frets	“Golden, golden is the air—” he chanted to the little pools of water. “Golden is the air, golden notes from golden mandolins, golden frets of golden violins, fair, oh, wearily fair. Skeins from braided basket, mortals may not hold; oh, what young extravagant God, who would know or ask it?.	Gold strings

mandolins, golden frets of golden violins, fair, oh, wearily fair.	“Golden, golden is the air—” he chanted to the little pools of water. “Golden is the air, golden notes from golden mandolins, golden frets of golden violins, fair, oh, wearily fair. Skeins from braided basket, mortals may not hold; oh, what young extravagant God, who would know or ask it?.	Mandolins, golden strings on golden violins, beautiful, oh, sadly beautiful.

golden mandolins	“Golden, golden is the air—” he chanted to the little pools of water. “Golden is the air, golden notes from golden mandolins, golden frets of golden violins, fair, oh, wearily fair. Skeins from braided basket, mortals may not hold; oh, what young extravagant God, who would know or ask it?.	Golden mandolins

braided basket	“Golden is the air, golden notes from golden mandolins, golden frets of golden violins, fair, oh, wearily fair. Skeins from braided basket, mortals may not hold; oh, what young extravagant God, who would know or ask it?. who could give such gold.”	Woven basket

Skeins from braided basket, mortals may not hold; oh, what young extravagant God, who would know or ask it?.	“Golden is the air, golden notes from golden mandolins, golden frets of golden violins, fair, oh, wearily fair. Skeins from braided basket, mortals may not hold; oh, what young extravagant God, who would know or ask it?. who could give such gold.”	Mortals cannot hold skeins from a braided basket; oh, what a young, extravagant God would know or ask for them?

what young extravagant God	“Golden is the air, golden notes from golden mandolins, golden frets of golden violins, fair, oh, wearily fair. Skeins from braided basket, mortals may not hold; oh, what young extravagant God, who would know or ask it?. who could give such gold.”	What young, excessive God

echoed as platoon after platoon swept over the floor and shuffled out the basketball markings.	Slowly and inevitably, yet with a sudden surge at the last, while Amory talked and dreamed, war rolled swiftly up the beach and washed the sands where Princeton played. Every night the gymnasium echoed as platoon after platoon swept over the floor and shuffled out the basketball markings. When Amory went to Washington the next weekend he caught some of the spirit of crisis which changed to repulsion in the Pullman car coming back, for the berths across from him were occupied by stinking aliens—Greeks, he guessed, or Russians.	The gymnasium echoed as group after group marched across the floor and erased the basketball court lines.

repulsion in the Pullman car coming back, for the berths across from him were occupied by stinking aliens—Greeks, he guessed, or Russians.	Every night the gymnasium echoed as platoon after platoon swept over the floor and shuffled out the basketball markings. When Amory went to Washington the next weekend he caught some of the spirit of crisis which changed to repulsion in the Pullman car coming back, for the berths across from him were occupied by stinking aliens—Greeks, he guessed, or Russians. He thought how much easier patriotism had been to a homogeneous race, how much easier it would have been to fight as the Colonies fought, or as the Confederacy fought.	He felt disgusted on the train coming back, because the beds across from him were occupied by smelly foreigners—Greeks, he thought, or Russians.

the Pullman car	Every night the gymnasium echoed as platoon after platoon swept over the floor and shuffled out the basketball markings. When Amory went to Washington the next weekend he caught some of the spirit of crisis which changed to repulsion in the Pullman car coming back, for the berths across from him were occupied by stinking aliens—Greeks, he guessed, or Russians. He thought how much easier patriotism had been to a homogeneous race, how much easier it would have been to fight as the Colonies fought, or as the Confederacy fought.	The train car

stinking aliens	Every night the gymnasium echoed as platoon after platoon swept over the floor and shuffled out the basketball markings. When Amory went to Washington the next weekend he caught some of the spirit of crisis which changed to repulsion in the Pullman car coming back, for the berths across from him were occupied by stinking aliens—Greeks, he guessed, or Russians. He thought how much easier patriotism had been to a homogeneous race, how much easier it would have been to fight as the Colonies fought, or as the Confederacy fought.	Smelly foreigners

how much easier patriotism	When Amory went to Washington the next weekend he caught some of the spirit of crisis which changed to repulsion in the Pullman car coming back, for the berths across from him were occupied by stinking aliens—Greeks, he guessed, or Russians. He thought how much easier patriotism had been to a homogeneous race, how much easier it would have been to fight as the Colonies fought, or as the Confederacy fought. And he did no sleeping that night, but listened to the aliens guffaw and snore while they filled the car with the heavy scent of latest America.	How much easier patriotism would be.

a homogeneous race	When Amory went to Washington the next weekend he caught some of the spirit of crisis which changed to repulsion in the Pullman car coming back, for the berths across from him were occupied by stinking aliens—Greeks, he guessed, or Russians. He thought how much easier patriotism had been to a homogeneous race, how much easier it would have been to fight as the Colonies fought, or as the Confederacy fought. And he did no sleeping that night, but listened to the aliens guffaw and snore while they filled the car with the heavy scent of latest America.	A race of people all the same

fought, or as the Confederacy fought.	When Amory went to Washington the next weekend he caught some of the spirit of crisis which changed to repulsion in the Pullman car coming back, for the berths across from him were occupied by stinking aliens—Greeks, he guessed, or Russians. He thought how much easier patriotism had been to a homogeneous race, how much easier it would have been to fight as the Colonies fought, or as the Confederacy fought. And he did no sleeping that night, but listened to the aliens guffaw and snore while they filled the car with the heavy scent of latest America.	fought, or how the Confederacy fought.

listened to the aliens guffaw and snore while they filled the car with the heavy scent of latest America.	He thought how much easier patriotism had been to a homogeneous race, how much easier it would have been to fight as the Colonies fought, or as the Confederacy fought. And he did no sleeping that night, but listened to the aliens guffaw and snore while they filled the car with the heavy scent of latest America. In Princeton everyone bantered in public and told themselves privately that their deaths at least would be heroic.	listened to the aliens laugh loudly and snore while they filled the car with the strong smell of modern America.

the heavy scent	He thought how much easier patriotism had been to a homogeneous race, how much easier it would have been to fight as the Colonies fought, or as the Confederacy fought. And he did no sleeping that night, but listened to the aliens guffaw and snore while they filled the car with the heavy scent of latest America. In Princeton everyone bantered in public and told themselves privately that their deaths at least would be heroic.	The strong smell

bantered in public and told themselves privately that their deaths at least would be heroic.	And he did no sleeping that night, but listened to the aliens guffaw and snore while they filled the car with the heavy scent of latest America. In Princeton everyone bantered in public and told themselves privately that their deaths at least would be heroic. The literary students read Rupert Brooke passionately; the lounge-lizards worried over whether the government would permit the English-cut uniform for officers; a few of the hopelessly lazy wrote to the obscure branches of the War Department, seeking an easy commission and a soft berth.	Joked in public but privately thought their deaths would be heroic.

the obscure branches	In Princeton everyone bantered in public and told themselves privately that their deaths at least would be heroic. The literary students read Rupert Brooke passionately; the lounge-lizards worried over whether the government would permit the English-cut uniform for officers; a few of the hopelessly lazy wrote to the obscure branches of the War Department, seeking an easy commission and a soft berth. Then, after a week, Amory saw Burne and knew at once that argument would be futile—Burne had come out as a pacifist.	lesser-known departments

the lounge-lizards	In Princeton everyone bantered in public and told themselves privately that their deaths at least would be heroic. The literary students read Rupert Brooke passionately; the lounge-lizards worried over whether the government would permit the English-cut uniform for officers; a few of the hopelessly lazy wrote to the obscure branches of the War Department, seeking an easy commission and a soft berth. Then, after a week, Amory saw Burne and knew at once that argument would be futile—Burne had come out as a pacifist.	The idle rich

a soft berth	In Princeton everyone bantered in public and told themselves privately that their deaths at least would be heroic. The literary students read Rupert Brooke passionately; the lounge-lizards worried over whether the government would permit the English-cut uniform for officers; a few of the hopelessly lazy wrote to the obscure branches of the War Department, seeking an easy commission and a soft berth. Then, after a week, Amory saw Burne and knew at once that argument would be futile—Burne had come out as a pacifist.	An easy job

permit the English-cut uniform for officers; a few of the hopelessly lazy wrote to the obscure branches of the War Department, seeking an easy commission and a soft berth.	In Princeton everyone bantered in public and told themselves privately that their deaths at least would be heroic. The literary students read Rupert Brooke passionately; the lounge-lizards worried over whether the government would permit the English-cut uniform for officers; a few of the hopelessly lazy wrote to the obscure branches of the War Department, seeking an easy commission and a soft berth. Then, after a week, Amory saw Burne and knew at once that argument would be futile—Burne had come out as a pacifist.	allow officers to wear the English-style uniform; some of the extremely lazy people wrote to less well-known sections of the War Department, hoping for an easy job and a comfortable position.

saw Burne and knew at once that argument would be futile—Burne had come out as a pacifist.	The literary students read Rupert Brooke passionately; the lounge-lizards worried over whether the government would permit the English-cut uniform for officers; a few of the hopelessly lazy wrote to the obscure branches of the War Department, seeking an easy commission and a soft berth. Then, after a week, Amory saw Burne and knew at once that argument would be futile—Burne had come out as a pacifist. The socialist magazines, a great smattering of Tolstoy, and his own intense longing for a cause that would bring out whatever strength lay in him, had finally decided him to preach peace as a subjective ideal.	saw Burne and knew immediately that arguing would be useless—Burne had become a pacifist.

his own intense longing	Then, after a week, Amory saw Burne and knew at once that argument would be futile—Burne had come out as a pacifist. The socialist magazines, a great smattering of Tolstoy, and his own intense longing for a cause that would bring out whatever strength lay in him, had finally decided him to preach peace as a subjective ideal. “When the German army entered Belgium,” he began, “if the inhabitants had gone peaceably about their business, the German army would have been disorganized in—” “I know,” Amory interrupted, “I’ve heard it all.	his strong desire

a great smattering	Then, after a week, Amory saw Burne and knew at once that argument would be futile—Burne had come out as a pacifist. The socialist magazines, a great smattering of Tolstoy, and his own intense longing for a cause that would bring out whatever strength lay in him, had finally decided him to preach peace as a subjective ideal. “When the German army entered Belgium,” he began, “if the inhabitants had gone peaceably about their business, the German army would have been disorganized in—” “I know,” Amory interrupted, “I’ve heard it all.	a lot

The socialist magazines	Then, after a week, Amory saw Burne and knew at once that argument would be futile—Burne had come out as a pacifist. The socialist magazines, a great smattering of Tolstoy, and his own intense longing for a cause that would bring out whatever strength lay in him, had finally decided him to preach peace as a subjective ideal. “When the German army entered Belgium,” he began, “if the inhabitants had gone peaceably about their business, the German army would have been disorganized in—” “I know,” Amory interrupted, “I’ve heard it all.	The socialist magazines

preach peace as a subjective ideal.	Then, after a week, Amory saw Burne and knew at once that argument would be futile—Burne had come out as a pacifist. The socialist magazines, a great smattering of Tolstoy, and his own intense longing for a cause that would bring out whatever strength lay in him, had finally decided him to preach peace as a subjective ideal. “When the German army entered Belgium,” he began, “if the inhabitants had gone peaceably about their business, the German army would have been disorganized in—” “I know,” Amory interrupted, “I’ve heard it all.	promote peace as a personal belief.

been disorganized in—” “I know,” Amory interrupted, “I’ve heard it all.	The socialist magazines, a great smattering of Tolstoy, and his own intense longing for a cause that would bring out whatever strength lay in him, had finally decided him to preach peace as a subjective ideal. “When the German army entered Belgium,” he began, “if the inhabitants had gone peaceably about their business, the German army would have been disorganized in—” “I know,” Amory interrupted, “I’ve heard it all. But I’m not going to talk propaganda with you.	been disorganized in—” “I know,” Amory interrupted, “I’ve heard it all.

talk propaganda with you.	“When the German army entered Belgium,” he began, “if the inhabitants had gone peaceably about their business, the German army would have been disorganized in—” “I know,” Amory interrupted, “I’ve heard it all. But I’m not going to talk propaganda with you. There’s a chance that you’re right—but even so we’re hundreds of years before the time when nonresistance can touch us as a reality.”	Talk propaganda with you.

’re hundreds of years before the time when nonresistance can touch us as a reality.”	But I’m not going to talk propaganda with you. There’s a chance that you’re right—but even so we’re hundreds of years before the time when nonresistance can touch us as a reality.” “But, Amory, listen—” “Burne, we’d just argue—” “Very well.”	We're still hundreds of years away from when nonresistance can actually work for us.

ask you to think of your family or friends, because I know they don’t count a picayune with you beside your sense of duty—but, Burne, how do you know that the magazines you read and the societies you join and these idealists you meet aren’t just plain German?”	“But, Amory, listen—” “Burne, we’d just argue—” “Very well.” “Just one thing—I don’t ask you to think of your family or friends, because I know they don’t count a picayune with you beside your sense of duty—but, Burne, how do you know that the magazines you read and the societies you join and these idealists you meet aren’t just plain German?” “Some of them are, of course.”	I don't expect you to think about your family or friends, because I know they're not important to you compared to your sense of duty—but, Burne, how do you know the magazines you read, the groups you join, and the idealistic people you meet aren't actually German?

lot of weak ones—with German-Jewish names.”	“Some of them are, of course.” “How do you know they aren’t all pro-German—just a lot of weak ones—with German-Jewish names.” “That’s the chance, of course,” he said slowly.	A lot of them are weak people with German-Jewish names.

my most innermost conviction	“That’s the chance, of course,” he said slowly. “How much or how little I’m taking this stand because of propaganda I’ve heard, I don’t know; naturally I think that it’s my most innermost conviction—it seems a path spread before me just now.” Amory’s heart sank.	my deepest belief

taking this stand because of propaganda I’ve heard, I don’t know; naturally I think that it’s my most innermost conviction—it seems a path spread before me just now.”	“That’s the chance, of course,” he said slowly. “How much or how little I’m taking this stand because of propaganda I’ve heard, I don’t know; naturally I think that it’s my most innermost conviction—it seems a path spread before me just now.” Amory’s heart sank.	I don't know how much of my position is due to propaganda. Of course, I believe it's my deepest conviction—it feels like the right way forward right now.

Amory’s heart	“How much or how little I’m taking this stand because of propaganda I’ve heard, I don’t know; naturally I think that it’s my most innermost conviction—it seems a path spread before me just now.” Amory’s heart sank. “But think of the cheapness of it—no one’s really going to martyr you for being a pacifist—it’s just going to throw you in with the worst—” “I doubt it,” he interrupted.	Amory's heart

cheapness of it—no one’s really going to martyr you for being a pacifist—it’s just going to throw you in with the worst—” “I doubt it,” he interrupted.	Amory’s heart sank. “But think of the cheapness of it—no one’s really going to martyr you for being a pacifist—it’s just going to throw you in with the worst—” “I doubt it,” he interrupted. “Well, it all smells of Bohemian New York to me.”	It's cheap—no one will actually kill you for being a pacifist—it'll just put you with the worst people.” “I doubt it,” he interrupted.

it all smells of Bohemian New York to me.”	“But think of the cheapness of it—no one’s really going to martyr you for being a pacifist—it’s just going to throw you in with the worst—” “I doubt it,” he interrupted. “Well, it all smells of Bohemian New York to me.” “I know what you mean, and that’s why I’m not sure I’ll agitate.”	It all seems like something from the artistic, unconventional side of New York to me.

listen—with all God’s given you.”	“I know what you mean, and that’s why I’m not sure I’ll agitate.” “You’re one man, Burne—going to talk to people who won’t listen—with all God’s given you.” “That’s what Stephen must have thought many years ago.	listen—with all the talents and abilities God gave you."

Stephen’s death	He probably thought as he was dying what a waste it all was. But you see, I’ve always felt that Stephen’s death was the thing that occurred to Paul on the road to Damascus, and sent him to preach the word of Christ all over the world.” “Go on.”	Stephen's death

word of Christ all over the world.”	He probably thought as he was dying what a waste it all was. But you see, I’ve always felt that Stephen’s death was the thing that occurred to Paul on the road to Damascus, and sent him to preach the word of Christ all over the world.” “Go on.”	the message of Christ everywhere.

just a pawn	“That’s all—this is my particular duty. Even if right now I’m just a pawn—just sacrificed. God!	Just a pawn

the huge spectre	Amory—you don’t think I like the Germans!” “Well, I can’t say anything else—I get to the end of all the logic about nonresistance, and there, like an excluded middle, stands the huge spectre of man as he is and always will be. And this spectre stands right beside the one logical necessity of Tolstoy’s, and the other logical necessity of Nietzsche’s—” Amory broke off suddenly.	The huge ghost

stands the huge spectre of man as he is and always will be.	Amory—you don’t think I like the Germans!” “Well, I can’t say anything else—I get to the end of all the logic about nonresistance, and there, like an excluded middle, stands the huge spectre of man as he is and always will be. And this spectre stands right beside the one logical necessity of Tolstoy’s, and the other logical necessity of Nietzsche’s—” Amory broke off suddenly.	The enormous image of man, the way he is and always will be, is present.

stands right beside the one logical necessity of Tolstoy’s, and the other logical necessity of Nietzsche’s—” Amory broke off suddenly.	“Well, I can’t say anything else—I get to the end of all the logic about nonresistance, and there, like an excluded middle, stands the huge spectre of man as he is and always will be. And this spectre stands right beside the one logical necessity of Tolstoy’s, and the other logical necessity of Nietzsche’s—” Amory broke off suddenly. “When are you going?”	is right next to Tolstoy's unavoidable conclusion, and Nietzsche's unavoidable conclusion—” Amory suddenly stopped.

a great resemblance	“I’ll see you, of course.” As he walked away it seemed to Amory that the look in his face bore a great resemblance to that in Kerry’s when he had said goodbye under Blair Arch two years before. Amory wondered unhappily why he could never go into anything with the primal honesty of those two.	very similar

Kerry’s when he had said goodbye under Blair Arch two years before.	“I’ll see you, of course.” As he walked away it seemed to Amory that the look in his face bore a great resemblance to that in Kerry’s when he had said goodbye under Blair Arch two years before. Amory wondered unhappily why he could never go into anything with the primal honesty of those two.	Kerry's look when he said goodbye under Blair Arch two years earlier.

the primal honesty	As he walked away it seemed to Amory that the look in his face bore a great resemblance to that in Kerry’s when he had said goodbye under Blair Arch two years before. Amory wondered unhappily why he could never go into anything with the primal honesty of those two. “Burne’s a fanatic,” he said to Tom, “and he’s dead wrong and, I’m inclined to think, just an unconscious pawn in the hands of anarchistic publishers and German-paid rag wavers—but he haunts me—just leaving everything worth while—” Burne left in a quietly dramatic manner a week later.	the most basic sincerity

go into anything with the primal honesty of those two.	As he walked away it seemed to Amory that the look in his face bore a great resemblance to that in Kerry’s when he had said goodbye under Blair Arch two years before. Amory wondered unhappily why he could never go into anything with the primal honesty of those two. “Burne’s a fanatic,” he said to Tom, “and he’s dead wrong and, I’m inclined to think, just an unconscious pawn in the hands of anarchistic publishers and German-paid rag wavers—but he haunts me—just leaving everything worth while—” Burne left in a quietly dramatic manner a week later.	start anything with the complete honesty of those two.

just an unconscious pawn	Amory wondered unhappily why he could never go into anything with the primal honesty of those two. “Burne’s a fanatic,” he said to Tom, “and he’s dead wrong and, I’m inclined to think, just an unconscious pawn in the hands of anarchistic publishers and German-paid rag wavers—but he haunts me—just leaving everything worth while—” Burne left in a quietly dramatic manner a week later. He sold all his possessions and came down to the room to say goodbye, with a battered old bicycle, on which he intended to ride to his home in Pennsylvania.	just someone who doesn't realize they're being used

anarchistic publishers	Amory wondered unhappily why he could never go into anything with the primal honesty of those two. “Burne’s a fanatic,” he said to Tom, “and he’s dead wrong and, I’m inclined to think, just an unconscious pawn in the hands of anarchistic publishers and German-paid rag wavers—but he haunts me—just leaving everything worth while—” Burne left in a quietly dramatic manner a week later. He sold all his possessions and came down to the room to say goodbye, with a battered old bicycle, on which he intended to ride to his home in Pennsylvania.	publishers who support chaos

haunts me—just leaving everything worth while—” Burne left in a quietly dramatic manner a week later.	Amory wondered unhappily why he could never go into anything with the primal honesty of those two. “Burne’s a fanatic,” he said to Tom, “and he’s dead wrong and, I’m inclined to think, just an unconscious pawn in the hands of anarchistic publishers and German-paid rag wavers—but he haunts me—just leaving everything worth while—” Burne left in a quietly dramatic manner a week later. He sold all his possessions and came down to the room to say goodbye, with a battered old bicycle, on which he intended to ride to his home in Pennsylvania.	He bothers me, like he's abandoning everything important. Burne left a week later in a quiet, dramatic way.

a quietly dramatic manner	Amory wondered unhappily why he could never go into anything with the primal honesty of those two. “Burne’s a fanatic,” he said to Tom, “and he’s dead wrong and, I’m inclined to think, just an unconscious pawn in the hands of anarchistic publishers and German-paid rag wavers—but he haunts me—just leaving everything worth while—” Burne left in a quietly dramatic manner a week later. He sold all his possessions and came down to the room to say goodbye, with a battered old bicycle, on which he intended to ride to his home in Pennsylvania.	a dramatic but quiet way

a battered old bicycle	“Burne’s a fanatic,” he said to Tom, “and he’s dead wrong and, I’m inclined to think, just an unconscious pawn in the hands of anarchistic publishers and German-paid rag wavers—but he haunts me—just leaving everything worth while—” Burne left in a quietly dramatic manner a week later. He sold all his possessions and came down to the room to say goodbye, with a battered old bicycle, on which he intended to ride to his home in Pennsylvania. “Peter the Hermit bidding farewell to Cardinal Richelieu,” suggested Alec, who was lounging in the window-seat as Burne and Amory shook hands.	an old, beat-up bicycle

intended to ride to his home in Pennsylvania.	“Burne’s a fanatic,” he said to Tom, “and he’s dead wrong and, I’m inclined to think, just an unconscious pawn in the hands of anarchistic publishers and German-paid rag wavers—but he haunts me—just leaving everything worth while—” Burne left in a quietly dramatic manner a week later. He sold all his possessions and came down to the room to say goodbye, with a battered old bicycle, on which he intended to ride to his home in Pennsylvania. “Peter the Hermit bidding farewell to Cardinal Richelieu,” suggested Alec, who was lounging in the window-seat as Burne and Amory shook hands.	planned to ride his bicycle home to Pennsylvania.

was not in a mood for that, and as he saw Burne’s long legs propel his ridiculous bicycle out of sight beyond Alexander Hall, he knew he was going to have a bad week.	“Peter the Hermit bidding farewell to Cardinal Richelieu,” suggested Alec, who was lounging in the window-seat as Burne and Amory shook hands. But Amory was not in a mood for that, and as he saw Burne’s long legs propel his ridiculous bicycle out of sight beyond Alexander Hall, he knew he was going to have a bad week. Not that he doubted the war—Germany stood for everything repugnant to him; for materialism and the direction of tremendous licentious force; it was just that Burne’s face stayed in his memory and he was sick of the hysteria he was beginning to hear.	He wasn't in the mood for that, and when he saw Burne's long legs pushing his silly bicycle out of sight past Alexander Hall, he knew he was going to have a bad week.

Burne’s long legs	“Peter the Hermit bidding farewell to Cardinal Richelieu,” suggested Alec, who was lounging in the window-seat as Burne and Amory shook hands. But Amory was not in a mood for that, and as he saw Burne’s long legs propel his ridiculous bicycle out of sight beyond Alexander Hall, he knew he was going to have a bad week. Not that he doubted the war—Germany stood for everything repugnant to him; for materialism and the direction of tremendous licentious force; it was just that Burne’s face stayed in his memory and he was sick of the hysteria he was beginning to hear.	Burne's long legs

his ridiculous bicycle	“Peter the Hermit bidding farewell to Cardinal Richelieu,” suggested Alec, who was lounging in the window-seat as Burne and Amory shook hands. But Amory was not in a mood for that, and as he saw Burne’s long legs propel his ridiculous bicycle out of sight beyond Alexander Hall, he knew he was going to have a bad week. Not that he doubted the war—Germany stood for everything repugnant to him; for materialism and the direction of tremendous licentious force; it was just that Burne’s face stayed in his memory and he was sick of the hysteria he was beginning to hear.	his silly bike

tremendous licentious force	But Amory was not in a mood for that, and as he saw Burne’s long legs propel his ridiculous bicycle out of sight beyond Alexander Hall, he knew he was going to have a bad week. Not that he doubted the war—Germany stood for everything repugnant to him; for materialism and the direction of tremendous licentious force; it was just that Burne’s face stayed in his memory and he was sick of the hysteria he was beginning to hear. “What on earth is the use of suddenly running down Goethe,” he declared to Alec and Tom.	powerful and unrestrained force

stood for everything repugnant to him; for materialism and the direction of tremendous licentious force; it was just that Burne’s face stayed in his memory and he was sick of the hysteria he was beginning to hear.	But Amory was not in a mood for that, and as he saw Burne’s long legs propel his ridiculous bicycle out of sight beyond Alexander Hall, he knew he was going to have a bad week. Not that he doubted the war—Germany stood for everything repugnant to him; for materialism and the direction of tremendous licentious force; it was just that Burne’s face stayed in his memory and he was sick of the hysteria he was beginning to hear. “What on earth is the use of suddenly running down Goethe,” he declared to Alec and Tom.	represented everything he hated: materialism and the use of extreme, uncontrolled power. It was just that he couldn't forget Burne's face, and he was tired of the overblown reactions he was hearing.

Burne’s face	But Amory was not in a mood for that, and as he saw Burne’s long legs propel his ridiculous bicycle out of sight beyond Alexander Hall, he knew he was going to have a bad week. Not that he doubted the war—Germany stood for everything repugnant to him; for materialism and the direction of tremendous licentious force; it was just that Burne’s face stayed in his memory and he was sick of the hysteria he was beginning to hear. “What on earth is the use of suddenly running down Goethe,” he declared to Alec and Tom.	Burne's face

running down Goethe,” he declared to Alec and Tom.	Not that he doubted the war—Germany stood for everything repugnant to him; for materialism and the direction of tremendous licentious force; it was just that Burne’s face stayed in his memory and he was sick of the hysteria he was beginning to hear. “What on earth is the use of suddenly running down Goethe,” he declared to Alec and Tom. “Why write books to prove he started the war—or that that stupid, overestimated Schiller is a demon in disguise?”	criticizing Goethe," he said to Alec and Tom.

books to prove he started the war—or that that stupid, overestimated Schiller is a demon in disguise?”	“What on earth is the use of suddenly running down Goethe,” he declared to Alec and Tom. “Why write books to prove he started the war—or that that stupid, overestimated Schiller is a demon in disguise?” “Have you ever read anything of theirs?” asked Tom shrewdly.	books that try to prove he started the war—or that the stupid, overrated Schiller is secretly a demon?

anything of theirs?” asked Tom shrewdly.	“Why write books to prove he started the war—or that that stupid, overestimated Schiller is a demon in disguise?” “Have you ever read anything of theirs?” asked Tom shrewdly. “No,” Amory admitted.	anything of theirs?" asked Tom shrewdly.

shelf in the library—to bore anyone that wants to read him!”	“Neither have I,” he said laughing. “People will shout,” said Alec quietly, “but Goethe’s on his same old shelf in the library—to bore anyone that wants to read him!” Amory subsided, and the subject dropped.	shelf in the library – to bore anyone who wants to read him!

thing for me—” “I feel as Amory does,” said Tom.	Amory subsided, and the subject dropped. “What are you going to do, Amory?” “Infantry or aviation, I can’t make up my mind—I hate mechanics, but then of course aviation’s the thing for me—” “I feel as Amory does,” said Tom. “Infantry or aviation—aviation sounds like the romantic side of the war, of course—like cavalry used to be, you know; but like Amory I don’t know a horsepower from a piston-rod.”	The best option for me is aviation." Tom said, "I feel the same way as Amory does."

a piston-rod	“What are you going to do, Amory?” “Infantry or aviation, I can’t make up my mind—I hate mechanics, but then of course aviation’s the thing for me—” “I feel as Amory does,” said Tom. “Infantry or aviation—aviation sounds like the romantic side of the war, of course—like cavalry used to be, you know; but like Amory I don’t know a horsepower from a piston-rod.” Somehow Amory’s dissatisfaction with his lack of enthusiasm culminated in an attempt to put the blame for the whole war on the ancestors of his generation.	a part of an engine

know a horsepower from a piston-rod.”	“What are you going to do, Amory?” “Infantry or aviation, I can’t make up my mind—I hate mechanics, but then of course aviation’s the thing for me—” “I feel as Amory does,” said Tom. “Infantry or aviation—aviation sounds like the romantic side of the war, of course—like cavalry used to be, you know; but like Amory I don’t know a horsepower from a piston-rod.” Somehow Amory’s dissatisfaction with his lack of enthusiasm culminated in an attempt to put the blame for the whole war on the ancestors of his generation.	know anything about engines.

ancestors of his generation.	“Infantry or aviation—aviation sounds like the romantic side of the war, of course—like cavalry used to be, you know; but like Amory I don’t know a horsepower from a piston-rod.” Somehow Amory’s dissatisfaction with his lack of enthusiasm culminated in an attempt to put the blame for the whole war on the ancestors of his generation. all the people who cheered for Germany in 1870.	His generation's ancestors.

Amory’s dissatisfaction	“Infantry or aviation—aviation sounds like the romantic side of the war, of course—like cavalry used to be, you know; but like Amory I don’t know a horsepower from a piston-rod.” Somehow Amory’s dissatisfaction with his lack of enthusiasm culminated in an attempt to put the blame for the whole war on the ancestors of his generation. all the people who cheered for Germany in 1870.	Amory's unhappiness

cheered for Germany in 1870.	Somehow Amory’s dissatisfaction with his lack of enthusiasm culminated in an attempt to put the blame for the whole war on the ancestors of his generation. all the people who cheered for Germany in 1870. All the materialists rampant, all the idolizers of German science and efficiency.	cheered for Germany in 1870.

All the materialists	all the people who cheered for Germany in 1870. All the materialists rampant, all the idolizers of German science and efficiency. So he sat one day in an English lecture and heard “Locksley Hall” quoted and fell into a brown study with contempt for Tennyson and all he stood for—for he took him as a representative of the Victorians.	All the materialists

idolizers of German science and efficiency.	all the people who cheered for Germany in 1870. All the materialists rampant, all the idolizers of German science and efficiency. So he sat one day in an English lecture and heard “Locksley Hall” quoted and fell into a brown study with contempt for Tennyson and all he stood for—for he took him as a representative of the Victorians.	People who worshipped German science and efficiency.

all the idolizers	all the people who cheered for Germany in 1870. All the materialists rampant, all the idolizers of German science and efficiency. So he sat one day in an English lecture and heard “Locksley Hall” quoted and fell into a brown study with contempt for Tennyson and all he stood for—for he took him as a representative of the Victorians.	All the people who worshiped

“Locksley Hall	All the materialists rampant, all the idolizers of German science and efficiency. So he sat one day in an English lecture and heard “Locksley Hall” quoted and fell into a brown study with contempt for Tennyson and all he stood for—for he took him as a representative of the Victorians. “Victorians, Victorians, who never learned to weep Who sowed the bitter harvest that your children go to reap—” scribbled Amory in his notebook.	“Locksley Hall”

stood for—for he took him as a representative of the Victorians.	All the materialists rampant, all the idolizers of German science and efficiency. So he sat one day in an English lecture and heard “Locksley Hall” quoted and fell into a brown study with contempt for Tennyson and all he stood for—for he took him as a representative of the Victorians. “Victorians, Victorians, who never learned to weep Who sowed the bitter harvest that your children go to reap—” scribbled Amory in his notebook.	stood for—because he saw him as a symbol of the Victorians.

go to reap—” scribbled Amory in his notebook.	So he sat one day in an English lecture and heard “Locksley Hall” quoted and fell into a brown study with contempt for Tennyson and all he stood for—for he took him as a representative of the Victorians. “Victorians, Victorians, who never learned to weep Who sowed the bitter harvest that your children go to reap—” scribbled Amory in his notebook. The lecturer was saying something about Tennyson’s solidity and fifty heads were bent to take notes.	go to harvest—" Amory scribbled in his notebook.

the bitter harvest	So he sat one day in an English lecture and heard “Locksley Hall” quoted and fell into a brown study with contempt for Tennyson and all he stood for—for he took him as a representative of the Victorians. “Victorians, Victorians, who never learned to weep Who sowed the bitter harvest that your children go to reap—” scribbled Amory in his notebook. The lecturer was saying something about Tennyson’s solidity and fifty heads were bent to take notes.	The bad consequences

something about Tennyson’s solidity and fifty heads were bent to take notes.	“Victorians, Victorians, who never learned to weep Who sowed the bitter harvest that your children go to reap—” scribbled Amory in his notebook. The lecturer was saying something about Tennyson’s solidity and fifty heads were bent to take notes. Amory turned over to a fresh page and began scrawling again.	Something about Tennyson's firmness and fifty people were taking notes.

Tennyson’s solidity	“Victorians, Victorians, who never learned to weep Who sowed the bitter harvest that your children go to reap—” scribbled Amory in his notebook. The lecturer was saying something about Tennyson’s solidity and fifty heads were bent to take notes. Amory turned over to a fresh page and began scrawling again.	Tennyson's stability

turned over to a fresh page and began scrawling again.	The lecturer was saying something about Tennyson’s solidity and fifty heads were bent to take notes. Amory turned over to a fresh page and began scrawling again. “They shuddered when they found what Mr. Darwin was about, They shuddered when the waltz came in and Newman hurried out—” But the waltz came in much earlier; he crossed that out.	turned to a new page and started writing again.

shuddered when they found what Mr. Darwin was about, They shuddered when the waltz came in and Newman hurried out—” But the waltz came in much earlier; he crossed that out.	Amory turned over to a fresh page and began scrawling again. “They shuddered when they found what Mr. Darwin was about, They shuddered when the waltz came in and Newman hurried out—” But the waltz came in much earlier; he crossed that out. “And entitled ‘A Song in the Time of Order,’ ” came the professor’s voice, droning far away.	They were shocked when they learned about Mr. Darwin's ideas. They were shocked when the waltz was introduced and Newman left quickly. But the waltz happened much earlier, so he crossed that out.

Song in the Time of Order,’ ” came the professor’s voice, droning far away.	“They shuddered when they found what Mr. Darwin was about, They shuddered when the waltz came in and Newman hurried out—” But the waltz came in much earlier; he crossed that out. “And entitled ‘A Song in the Time of Order,’ ” came the professor’s voice, droning far away. “Time of Order”—Good Lord!	"Song in the Time of Order," the professor's voice said, sounding distant and monotonous.

the professor’s voice	“They shuddered when they found what Mr. Darwin was about, They shuddered when the waltz came in and Newman hurried out—” But the waltz came in much earlier; he crossed that out. “And entitled ‘A Song in the Time of Order,’ ” came the professor’s voice, droning far away. “Time of Order”—Good Lord!	The professor's voice

Time of Order”—Good Lord!	“And entitled ‘A Song in the Time of Order,’ ” came the professor’s voice, droning far away. “Time of Order”—Good Lord! Everything crammed in the box and the Victorians sitting on the lid smiling serenely.	"Time of Order"—Good Lord!

sitting on the lid smiling serenely.	“Time of Order”—Good Lord! Everything crammed in the box and the Victorians sitting on the lid smiling serenely. With Browning in his Italian villa crying bravely: “All’s for the best.”	Smiling calmly while on top.

Browning in his Italian villa crying bravely: “All’s for the best.”	Everything crammed in the box and the Victorians sitting on the lid smiling serenely. With Browning in his Italian villa crying bravely: “All’s for the best.” Amory scribbled again.	Browning, in his Italian villa, cried bravely: "Everything is for the best."

your ‘glorious gains’—reproached him	Amory scribbled again. “You knelt up in the temple and he bent to hear you pray, You thanked him for your ‘glorious gains’—reproached him for ‘Cathay.’ ” Why could he never get more than a couplet at a time?	You thanked him for your "great profits"—you blamed him

bent to hear you pray, You thanked him for your ‘glorious gains’—reproached him for ‘Cathay.’ ”	Amory scribbled again. “You knelt up in the temple and he bent to hear you pray, You thanked him for your ‘glorious gains’—reproached him for ‘Cathay.’ ” Why could he never get more than a couplet at a time?	He listened to your prayer, and you thanked him for your "great achievements" but criticized him for "Cathay."

get more than a couplet at a time?	“You knelt up in the temple and he bent to hear you pray, You thanked him for your ‘glorious gains’—reproached him for ‘Cathay.’ ” Why could he never get more than a couplet at a time? Now he needed something to rhyme with: “You would keep Him straight with science, though He had gone wrong before.”	Why could he never write more than two lines at a time?

keep Him straight with science, though He had gone wrong before.”	Why could he never get more than a couplet at a time? Now he needed something to rhyme with: “You would keep Him straight with science, though He had gone wrong before.” Well, anyway.	You would correct Him with science, even though He had made mistakes before.

met your children in your home—‘I’ve fixed it up!’	Well, anyway. “You met your children in your home—‘I’ve fixed it up!’ you cried, Took your fifty years of Europe, and then virtuously—died.”	You met your children at your home and said, "I've fixed it up!"

years of Europe, and then virtuously—died.”	“You met your children in your home—‘I’ve fixed it up!’ you cried, Took your fifty years of Europe, and then virtuously—died.” “That was to a great extent Tennyson’s idea,” came the lecturer’s voice.	You lived in Europe for fifty years and then died with a good reputation.

Tennyson’s idea	you cried, Took your fifty years of Europe, and then virtuously—died.” “That was to a great extent Tennyson’s idea,” came the lecturer’s voice. “Swinburne’s ‘Song in the Time of Order’ might well have been Tennyson’s title.	Tennyson's idea

was to a great extent Tennyson’s idea,” came the lecturer’s voice.	you cried, Took your fifty years of Europe, and then virtuously—died.” “That was to a great extent Tennyson’s idea,” came the lecturer’s voice. “Swinburne’s ‘Song in the Time of Order’ might well have been Tennyson’s title.	That was mostly Tennyson's idea," the lecturer said.

the lecturer’s voice	you cried, Took your fifty years of Europe, and then virtuously—died.” “That was to a great extent Tennyson’s idea,” came the lecturer’s voice. “Swinburne’s ‘Song in the Time of Order’ might well have been Tennyson’s title.	The lecturer said

Time of Order’ might well have been Tennyson’s title.	“That was to a great extent Tennyson’s idea,” came the lecturer’s voice. “Swinburne’s ‘Song in the Time of Order’ might well have been Tennyson’s title. He idealized order against chaos, against waste.”	Tennyson could easily have used "Time of Order" as the title.

Swinburne’s ‘Song	“That was to a great extent Tennyson’s idea,” came the lecturer’s voice. “Swinburne’s ‘Song in the Time of Order’ might well have been Tennyson’s title. He idealized order against chaos, against waste.”	Swinburne’s "Song"

Tennyson’s title	“That was to a great extent Tennyson’s idea,” came the lecturer’s voice. “Swinburne’s ‘Song in the Time of Order’ might well have been Tennyson’s title. He idealized order against chaos, against waste.”	Tennyson's title

order against chaos, against waste.”	“Swinburne’s ‘Song in the Time of Order’ might well have been Tennyson’s title. He idealized order against chaos, against waste.” At last Amory had it.	Order versus chaos, versus waste.

last Amory	He idealized order against chaos, against waste.” At last Amory had it. He turned over another page and scrawled vigorously for the twenty minutes that was left of the hour.	Amory finally understood.

minutes that was left of the hour.	At last Amory had it. He turned over another page and scrawled vigorously for the twenty minutes that was left of the hour. Then he walked up to the desk and deposited a page torn out of his notebook.	minutes left of the hour.

page torn out of his notebook.	He turned over another page and scrawled vigorously for the twenty minutes that was left of the hour. Then he walked up to the desk and deposited a page torn out of his notebook. “Here’s a poem to the Victorians, sir,” he said coldly.	A page ripped from his notebook.

poem to the Victorians, sir,” he said coldly.	Then he walked up to the desk and deposited a page torn out of his notebook. “Here’s a poem to the Victorians, sir,” he said coldly. The professor picked it up curiously while Amory backed rapidly through the door.	"Here's a poem for the Victorians," he said coldly.

backed rapidly through the door.	“Here’s a poem to the Victorians, sir,” he said coldly. The professor picked it up curiously while Amory backed rapidly through the door. Here is what he had written: “Songs in the time of order You left for us to sing, Proofs with excluded middles, Answers to life in rhyme, Keys of the prison warder And ancient bells to ring, Time was the end of riddles, We were the end of time.	Quickly went backward through the door.

end of riddles, We were the end of time.	The professor picked it up curiously while Amory backed rapidly through the door. Here is what he had written: “Songs in the time of order You left for us to sing, Proofs with excluded middles, Answers to life in rhyme, Keys of the prison warder And ancient bells to ring, Time was the end of riddles, We were the end of time. Here were domestic oceans And a sky that we might reach, Guns and a guarded border, Gantlets—but not to fling, Thousands of old emotions And a platitude for each, Songs in the time of order —And tongues, that we might sing.”	We solved all the mysteries, and now we are at the end.

the prison warder	The professor picked it up curiously while Amory backed rapidly through the door. Here is what he had written: “Songs in the time of order You left for us to sing, Proofs with excluded middles, Answers to life in rhyme, Keys of the prison warder And ancient bells to ring, Time was the end of riddles, We were the end of time. Here were domestic oceans And a sky that we might reach, Guns and a guarded border, Gantlets—but not to fling, Thousands of old emotions And a platitude for each, Songs in the time of order —And tongues, that we might sing.”	The prison guard

sky that we might reach, Guns and a guarded border, Gantlets—but not to fling, Thousands of old emotions And a platitude for each, Songs in the time of order —And tongues, that we might sing.”	Here is what he had written: “Songs in the time of order You left for us to sing, Proofs with excluded middles, Answers to life in rhyme, Keys of the prison warder And ancient bells to ring, Time was the end of riddles, We were the end of time. Here were domestic oceans And a sky that we might reach, Guns and a guarded border, Gantlets—but not to fling, Thousands of old emotions And a platitude for each, Songs in the time of order —And tongues, that we might sing.”	sky we could touch, Guns and a protected border, Gauntlets—but not to throw, Thousands of old feelings And a cliché for each, Songs in an orderly time—And tongues, so we could sing.”

old emotions	Here is what he had written: “Songs in the time of order You left for us to sing, Proofs with excluded middles, Answers to life in rhyme, Keys of the prison warder And ancient bells to ring, Time was the end of riddles, We were the end of time. Here were domestic oceans And a sky that we might reach, Guns and a guarded border, Gantlets—but not to fling, Thousands of old emotions And a platitude for each, Songs in the time of order —And tongues, that we might sing.”	Old feelings

the club veranda	Early April slipped by in a haze—a haze of long evenings on the club veranda with the graphophone playing “Poor Butterfly” inside. for “Poor Butterfly” had been the song of that last year.	The club's porch.

haze of long evenings on the club veranda with the graphophone playing “Poor Butterfly” inside.	Early April slipped by in a haze—a haze of long evenings on the club veranda with the graphophone playing “Poor Butterfly” inside. for “Poor Butterfly” had been the song of that last year.	A blur of long evenings spent on the club porch, with the record player inside playing "Poor Butterfly."

was the last spring under the old regime.	for “Poor Butterfly” had been the song of that last year. The war seemed scarcely to touch them and it might have been one of the senior springs of the past, except for the drilling every other afternoon, yet Amory realized poignantly that this was the last spring under the old regime. “This is the great protest against the superman,” said Amory.	It was the last spring of the old way of life.

protest against the superman,” said Amory.	The war seemed scarcely to touch them and it might have been one of the senior springs of the past, except for the drilling every other afternoon, yet Amory realized poignantly that this was the last spring under the old regime. “This is the great protest against the superman,” said Amory. “I suppose so,” Alec agreed.	Protest against the superman,” said Amory.

irreconcilable with any Utopia.	“I suppose so,” Alec agreed. “He’s absolutely irreconcilable with any Utopia. As long as he occurs, there’s trouble and all the latent evil that makes a crowd list and sway when he talks.”	Can't fit in any perfect society.

all the latent evil	“He’s absolutely irreconcilable with any Utopia. As long as he occurs, there’s trouble and all the latent evil that makes a crowd list and sway when he talks.” “And of course all that he is is a gifted man without a moral sense.”	All the hidden bad things

long as he occurs, there’s trouble and all the latent evil that makes a crowd list and sway when he talks.”	“He’s absolutely irreconcilable with any Utopia. As long as he occurs, there’s trouble and all the latent evil that makes a crowd list and sway when he talks.” “And of course all that he is is a gifted man without a moral sense.”	As long as he's around, there will be problems, and all the hidden badness that makes a crowd lean and react when he speaks."

a gifted man	As long as he occurs, there’s trouble and all the latent evil that makes a crowd list and sway when he talks.” “And of course all that he is is a gifted man without a moral sense.” “That’s all.	A talented man

thing to contemplate is this—it’s all happened before, how soon will it happen again?	“That’s all. I think the worst thing to contemplate is this—it’s all happened before, how soon will it happen again? Fifty years after Waterloo Napoleon was as much a hero to English school children as Wellington.	The thing to think about is this—it's all happened before, how soon will it happen again?

hero to English school children as Wellington.	I think the worst thing to contemplate is this—it’s all happened before, how soon will it happen again? Fifty years after Waterloo Napoleon was as much a hero to English school children as Wellington. How do we know our grandchildren won’t idolize Von Hindenburg the same way?”	a hero to English schoolchildren like Wellington.

look on evil as evil, whether it’s clothed in filth or monotony or magnificence.”	“Time, damn it, and the historian. If we could only learn to look on evil as evil, whether it’s clothed in filth or monotony or magnificence.” “God!	See evil for what it is, no matter if it's ugly, boring, or impressive.

raked the universe over the coals for four years?”	“God! Haven’t we raked the universe over the coals for four years?” Then the night came that was to be the last.	Scoured the universe for four years?”

night came that was to be the last.	Haven’t we raked the universe over the coals for four years?” Then the night came that was to be the last. Tom and Amory, bound in the morning for different training-camps, paced the shadowy walks as usual and seemed still to see around them the faces of the men they knew.	The night came that would be the final one.

faces of the men they knew.	Then the night came that was to be the last. Tom and Amory, bound in the morning for different training-camps, paced the shadowy walks as usual and seemed still to see around them the faces of the men they knew. “The grass is full of ghosts tonight.”	the faces of the men they knew.

the shadowy walks	Then the night came that was to be the last. Tom and Amory, bound in the morning for different training-camps, paced the shadowy walks as usual and seemed still to see around them the faces of the men they knew. “The grass is full of ghosts tonight.”	The dark paths

watched the moon rise, to make silver of the slate roof of Dodd and blue the rustling trees.	“The whole campus is alive with them.” They paused by Little and watched the moon rise, to make silver of the slate roof of Dodd and blue the rustling trees. “You know,” whispered Tom, “what we feel now is the sense of all the gorgeous youth that has rioted through here in two hundred years.”	watched the moon rise, making the slate roof of Dodd silver and the rustling trees blue.

the slate roof	“The whole campus is alive with them.” They paused by Little and watched the moon rise, to make silver of the slate roof of Dodd and blue the rustling trees. “You know,” whispered Tom, “what we feel now is the sense of all the gorgeous youth that has rioted through here in two hundred years.”	The slate roof

the rustling trees	“The whole campus is alive with them.” They paused by Little and watched the moon rise, to make silver of the slate roof of Dodd and blue the rustling trees. “You know,” whispered Tom, “what we feel now is the sense of all the gorgeous youth that has rioted through here in two hundred years.”	The trees that are moving in the wind.

sense of all the gorgeous youth that has rioted through here in two hundred years.”	They paused by Little and watched the moon rise, to make silver of the slate roof of Dodd and blue the rustling trees. “You know,” whispered Tom, “what we feel now is the sense of all the gorgeous youth that has rioted through here in two hundred years.” A last burst of singing flooded up from Blair Arch—broken voices for some long parting.	The feeling of all the wonderful young people who have lived here in the past two hundred years.

flooded up from Blair Arch—broken voices for some long parting.	“You know,” whispered Tom, “what we feel now is the sense of all the gorgeous youth that has rioted through here in two hundred years.” A last burst of singing flooded up from Blair Arch—broken voices for some long parting. “And what we leave here is more than this class; it’s the whole heritage of youth.	Singing poured up from Blair Arch, with broken voices saying goodbye.

some long parting	“You know,” whispered Tom, “what we feel now is the sense of all the gorgeous youth that has rioted through here in two hundred years.” A last burst of singing flooded up from Blair Arch—broken voices for some long parting. “And what we leave here is more than this class; it’s the whole heritage of youth.	Saying goodbye for a long time.

’re just one generation—we’re breaking all the links that seemed to bind us here to top-booted and high-stocked generations.	“And what we leave here is more than this class; it’s the whole heritage of youth. We’re just one generation—we’re breaking all the links that seemed to bind us here to top-booted and high-stocked generations. We’ve walked arm and arm with Burr and Light-Horse Harry Lee through half these deep-blue nights.”	We're just one generation, and we're breaking all the connections that seemed to tie us to the generations that came before us.

Burr and Light-Horse Harry Lee	We’re just one generation—we’re breaking all the links that seemed to bind us here to top-booted and high-stocked generations. We’ve walked arm and arm with Burr and Light-Horse Harry Lee through half these deep-blue nights.” “That’s what they are,” Tom tangented off, “deep blue—a bit of color would spoil them, make them exotic.	Burr and Light-Horse Harry Lee

walked arm and arm with Burr and Light-Horse Harry Lee through half these deep-blue nights.”	We’re just one generation—we’re breaking all the links that seemed to bind us here to top-booted and high-stocked generations. We’ve walked arm and arm with Burr and Light-Horse Harry Lee through half these deep-blue nights.” “That’s what they are,” Tom tangented off, “deep blue—a bit of color would spoil them, make them exotic.	We walked with Burr and Light-Horse Harry Lee through many of these dark blue nights.

bit of color would spoil them, make them exotic.	We’ve walked arm and arm with Burr and Light-Horse Harry Lee through half these deep-blue nights.” “That’s what they are,” Tom tangented off, “deep blue—a bit of color would spoil them, make them exotic. Spires, against a sky that’s a promise of dawn, and blue light on the slate roofs—it hurts.	Adding color would ruin them, make them seem strange.

promise of dawn, and blue light on the slate roofs—it hurts.	“That’s what they are,” Tom tangented off, “deep blue—a bit of color would spoil them, make them exotic. Spires, against a sky that’s a promise of dawn, and blue light on the slate roofs—it hurts. rather—” “Goodbye, Aaron Burr,” Amory called toward deserted Nassau Hall, “you and I knew strange corners of life.”	The promise of dawn, and blue light on the slate roofs—it's painful.

the slate roofs	“That’s what they are,” Tom tangented off, “deep blue—a bit of color would spoil them, make them exotic. Spires, against a sky that’s a promise of dawn, and blue light on the slate roofs—it hurts. rather—” “Goodbye, Aaron Burr,” Amory called toward deserted Nassau Hall, “you and I knew strange corners of life.”	The slate roofs.

deserted Nassau Hall	Spires, against a sky that’s a promise of dawn, and blue light on the slate roofs—it hurts. rather—” “Goodbye, Aaron Burr,” Amory called toward deserted Nassau Hall, “you and I knew strange corners of life.” His voice echoed in the stillness.	Empty Nassau Hall

called toward deserted Nassau Hall, “you and I knew strange corners of life.”	Spires, against a sky that’s a promise of dawn, and blue light on the slate roofs—it hurts. rather—” “Goodbye, Aaron Burr,” Amory called toward deserted Nassau Hall, “you and I knew strange corners of life.” His voice echoed in the stillness.	He shouted toward the empty Nassau Hall, "You and I experienced unusual parts of life."

echoed in the stillness.	rather—” “Goodbye, Aaron Burr,” Amory called toward deserted Nassau Hall, “you and I knew strange corners of life.” His voice echoed in the stillness. “The torches are out,” whispered Tom.	The sound bounced back in the quiet.

voices of freshman year surged around them and then they looked at each other with faint tears in their eyes.	“The torches are out,” whispered Tom. “Ah, Messalina, the long shadows are building minarets on the stadium—” For an instant the voices of freshman year surged around them and then they looked at each other with faint tears in their eyes. “Damn!”	They remembered their first year, and then they looked at each other with tears in their eyes.

faint tears	“The torches are out,” whispered Tom. “Ah, Messalina, the long shadows are building minarets on the stadium—” For an instant the voices of freshman year surged around them and then they looked at each other with faint tears in their eyes. “Damn!”	A few tears

Ah, Messalina	“The torches are out,” whispered Tom. “Ah, Messalina, the long shadows are building minarets on the stadium—” For an instant the voices of freshman year surged around them and then they looked at each other with faint tears in their eyes. “Damn!”	Oh, Messalina

freshman year	“The torches are out,” whispered Tom. “Ah, Messalina, the long shadows are building minarets on the stadium—” For an instant the voices of freshman year surged around them and then they looked at each other with faint tears in their eyes. “Damn!”	Freshman year.

something of this to keep, the essence of an hour.	“Damn!” The last light fades and drifts across the land—the low, long land, the sunny land of spires; the ghosts of evening tune again their lyres and wander singing in a plaintive band down the long corridors of trees; pale fires echo the night from tower top to tower: Oh, sleep that dreams, and dream that never tires, press from the petals of the lotus flower something of this to keep, the essence of an hour. No more to wait the twilight of the moon in this sequestered vale of star and spire, for one eternal morning of desire passes to time and earthy afternoon.	Keep something of this, the feeling of this moment.

the long corridors	“Damn!” The last light fades and drifts across the land—the low, long land, the sunny land of spires; the ghosts of evening tune again their lyres and wander singing in a plaintive band down the long corridors of trees; pale fires echo the night from tower top to tower: Oh, sleep that dreams, and dream that never tires, press from the petals of the lotus flower something of this to keep, the essence of an hour. No more to wait the twilight of the moon in this sequestered vale of star and spire, for one eternal morning of desire passes to time and earthy afternoon.	The long corridors

a plaintive band	“Damn!” The last light fades and drifts across the land—the low, long land, the sunny land of spires; the ghosts of evening tune again their lyres and wander singing in a plaintive band down the long corridors of trees; pale fires echo the night from tower top to tower: Oh, sleep that dreams, and dream that never tires, press from the petals of the lotus flower something of this to keep, the essence of an hour. No more to wait the twilight of the moon in this sequestered vale of star and spire, for one eternal morning of desire passes to time and earthy afternoon.	a sad group

wait the twilight of the moon in this sequestered vale of star and spire, for one eternal morning of desire passes to time and earthy afternoon.	The last light fades and drifts across the land—the low, long land, the sunny land of spires; the ghosts of evening tune again their lyres and wander singing in a plaintive band down the long corridors of trees; pale fires echo the night from tower top to tower: Oh, sleep that dreams, and dream that never tires, press from the petals of the lotus flower something of this to keep, the essence of an hour. No more to wait the twilight of the moon in this sequestered vale of star and spire, for one eternal morning of desire passes to time and earthy afternoon. Here, Heraclitus, did you find in fire and shifting things the prophecy you hurled down the dead years; this midnight my desire will see, shadowed among the embers, furled in flame, the splendor and the sadness of the world.	No longer wait for the moonlight in this isolated valley of stars and towers, because an endless morning of desire gives way to time and the ordinary afternoon.

earthy afternoon	The last light fades and drifts across the land—the low, long land, the sunny land of spires; the ghosts of evening tune again their lyres and wander singing in a plaintive band down the long corridors of trees; pale fires echo the night from tower top to tower: Oh, sleep that dreams, and dream that never tires, press from the petals of the lotus flower something of this to keep, the essence of an hour. No more to wait the twilight of the moon in this sequestered vale of star and spire, for one eternal morning of desire passes to time and earthy afternoon. Here, Heraclitus, did you find in fire and shifting things the prophecy you hurled down the dead years; this midnight my desire will see, shadowed among the embers, furled in flame, the splendor and the sadness of the world.	afternoon on Earth

this sequestered vale	The last light fades and drifts across the land—the low, long land, the sunny land of spires; the ghosts of evening tune again their lyres and wander singing in a plaintive band down the long corridors of trees; pale fires echo the night from tower top to tower: Oh, sleep that dreams, and dream that never tires, press from the petals of the lotus flower something of this to keep, the essence of an hour. No more to wait the twilight of the moon in this sequestered vale of star and spire, for one eternal morning of desire passes to time and earthy afternoon. Here, Heraclitus, did you find in fire and shifting things the prophecy you hurled down the dead years; this midnight my desire will see, shadowed among the embers, furled in flame, the splendor and the sadness of the world.	this hidden valley

shadowed among the embers, furled in flame, the splendor and the sadness of the world.	No more to wait the twilight of the moon in this sequestered vale of star and spire, for one eternal morning of desire passes to time and earthy afternoon. Here, Heraclitus, did you find in fire and shifting things the prophecy you hurled down the dead years; this midnight my desire will see, shadowed among the embers, furled in flame, the splendor and the sadness of the world.	Shadowed in the embers and wrapped in flame, I will see the beauty and sorrow of the world.

letter dated January, 1918, written by Monsignor Darcy to Amory, who is a second lieutenant in the 171st Infantry, Port of Embarkation, Camp Mills, Long Island.	May, 1917–February, 1919 A letter dated January, 1918, written by Monsignor Darcy to Amory, who is a second lieutenant in the 171st Infantry, Port of Embarkation, Camp Mills, Long Island. My dear Boy: All you need tell me of yourself is that you still are; for the rest I merely search back in a restive memory, a thermometer that records only fevers, and match you with what I was at your age.	A letter from Monsignor Darcy to Amory, a second lieutenant in the 171st Infantry at the Port of Embarkation, Camp Mills, Long Island, written in January 1918.

the 171st Infantry	May, 1917–February, 1919 A letter dated January, 1918, written by Monsignor Darcy to Amory, who is a second lieutenant in the 171st Infantry, Port of Embarkation, Camp Mills, Long Island. My dear Boy: All you need tell me of yourself is that you still are; for the rest I merely search back in a restive memory, a thermometer that records only fevers, and match you with what I was at your age.	the 171st Infantry

a second lieutenant	May, 1917–February, 1919 A letter dated January, 1918, written by Monsignor Darcy to Amory, who is a second lieutenant in the 171st Infantry, Port of Embarkation, Camp Mills, Long Island. My dear Boy: All you need tell me of yourself is that you still are; for the rest I merely search back in a restive memory, a thermometer that records only fevers, and match you with what I was at your age.	a second lieutenant

a restive memory	May, 1917–February, 1919 A letter dated January, 1918, written by Monsignor Darcy to Amory, who is a second lieutenant in the 171st Infantry, Port of Embarkation, Camp Mills, Long Island. My dear Boy: All you need tell me of yourself is that you still are; for the rest I merely search back in a restive memory, a thermometer that records only fevers, and match you with what I was at your age. But men will chatter and you	A restless memory

falls plump!	But men will chatter and you and I will still shout our futilities to each other across the stage until the last silly curtain falls plump! upon our bobbing heads.	falls down!

the last silly curtain	But men will chatter and you and I will still shout our futilities to each other across the stage until the last silly curtain falls plump! upon our bobbing heads.	the very last curtain

the colossal stupidity	upon our bobbing heads. But you are starting the spluttering magic-lantern show of life with much the same array of slides as I had, so I need to write you if only to shriek the colossal stupidity of people. This is the end of one thing: for better or worse you will never again be quite the Amory Blaine that I knew, never again will we meet as we have met, because your generation is growing hard, much harder than mine ever grew, nourished as they were on the stuff of the nineties.	The huge stupidity

write you if only to shriek the colossal stupidity of people.	upon our bobbing heads. But you are starting the spluttering magic-lantern show of life with much the same array of slides as I had, so I need to write you if only to shriek the colossal stupidity of people. This is the end of one thing: for better or worse you will never again be quite the Amory Blaine that I knew, never again will we meet as we have met, because your generation is growing hard, much harder than mine ever grew, nourished as they were on the stuff of the nineties.	I need to write to you, if only to scream about how incredibly stupid people are.

the spluttering magic-lantern show	upon our bobbing heads. But you are starting the spluttering magic-lantern show of life with much the same array of slides as I had, so I need to write you if only to shriek the colossal stupidity of people. This is the end of one thing: for better or worse you will never again be quite the Amory Blaine that I knew, never again will we meet as we have met, because your generation is growing hard, much harder than mine ever grew, nourished as they were on the stuff of the nineties.	the unreliable slideshow

meet as we have met, because your generation is growing hard, much harder than mine ever grew, nourished as they were on the stuff of the nineties.	But you are starting the spluttering magic-lantern show of life with much the same array of slides as I had, so I need to write you if only to shriek the colossal stupidity of people. This is the end of one thing: for better or worse you will never again be quite the Amory Blaine that I knew, never again will we meet as we have met, because your generation is growing hard, much harder than mine ever grew, nourished as they were on the stuff of the nineties. Amory, lately I reread Aeschylus and there in the divine irony of the Agamemnon I find the only answer to this bitter age—all the world tumbled about our ears, and the closest parallel ages back in that hopeless resignation.	meet as we did before, because your generation is becoming tougher, much tougher than mine ever was, which was influenced by the ideas of the nineties.

quite the Amory Blaine	But you are starting the spluttering magic-lantern show of life with much the same array of slides as I had, so I need to write you if only to shriek the colossal stupidity of people. This is the end of one thing: for better or worse you will never again be quite the Amory Blaine that I knew, never again will we meet as we have met, because your generation is growing hard, much harder than mine ever grew, nourished as they were on the stuff of the nineties. Amory, lately I reread Aeschylus and there in the divine irony of the Agamemnon I find the only answer to this bitter age—all the world tumbled about our ears, and the closest parallel ages back in that hopeless resignation.	exactly the Amory Blaine

that hopeless resignation	This is the end of one thing: for better or worse you will never again be quite the Amory Blaine that I knew, never again will we meet as we have met, because your generation is growing hard, much harder than mine ever grew, nourished as they were on the stuff of the nineties. Amory, lately I reread Aeschylus and there in the divine irony of the Agamemnon I find the only answer to this bitter age—all the world tumbled about our ears, and the closest parallel ages back in that hopeless resignation. There are times when I think of the men out there as Roman legionaries, miles from their corrupt city, stemming back the hordes.	that feeling of giving up

this bitter age	This is the end of one thing: for better or worse you will never again be quite the Amory Blaine that I knew, never again will we meet as we have met, because your generation is growing hard, much harder than mine ever grew, nourished as they were on the stuff of the nineties. Amory, lately I reread Aeschylus and there in the divine irony of the Agamemnon I find the only answer to this bitter age—all the world tumbled about our ears, and the closest parallel ages back in that hopeless resignation. There are times when I think of the men out there as Roman legionaries, miles from their corrupt city, stemming back the hordes.	this difficult time

the divine irony	This is the end of one thing: for better or worse you will never again be quite the Amory Blaine that I knew, never again will we meet as we have met, because your generation is growing hard, much harder than mine ever grew, nourished as they were on the stuff of the nineties. Amory, lately I reread Aeschylus and there in the divine irony of the Agamemnon I find the only answer to this bitter age—all the world tumbled about our ears, and the closest parallel ages back in that hopeless resignation. There are times when I think of the men out there as Roman legionaries, miles from their corrupt city, stemming back the hordes.	the ironic truth

ages back in that hopeless resignation.	This is the end of one thing: for better or worse you will never again be quite the Amory Blaine that I knew, never again will we meet as we have met, because your generation is growing hard, much harder than mine ever grew, nourished as they were on the stuff of the nineties. Amory, lately I reread Aeschylus and there in the divine irony of the Agamemnon I find the only answer to this bitter age—all the world tumbled about our ears, and the closest parallel ages back in that hopeless resignation. There are times when I think of the men out there as Roman legionaries, miles from their corrupt city, stemming back the hordes.	Long ago, in that feeling of giving up hope.

Roman legionaries	Amory, lately I reread Aeschylus and there in the divine irony of the Agamemnon I find the only answer to this bitter age—all the world tumbled about our ears, and the closest parallel ages back in that hopeless resignation. There are times when I think of the men out there as Roman legionaries, miles from their corrupt city, stemming back the hordes. hordes a little more menacing, after all, than the corrupt city.	Roman legionaries

times when I think of the men out there as Roman legionaries, miles from their corrupt city, stemming back the hordes.	Amory, lately I reread Aeschylus and there in the divine irony of the Agamemnon I find the only answer to this bitter age—all the world tumbled about our ears, and the closest parallel ages back in that hopeless resignation. There are times when I think of the men out there as Roman legionaries, miles from their corrupt city, stemming back the hordes. hordes a little more menacing, after all, than the corrupt city.	Sometimes I think of the soldiers out there as Roman soldiers, far from their corrupt city, holding back the enemies.

their corrupt city	Amory, lately I reread Aeschylus and there in the divine irony of the Agamemnon I find the only answer to this bitter age—all the world tumbled about our ears, and the closest parallel ages back in that hopeless resignation. There are times when I think of the men out there as Roman legionaries, miles from their corrupt city, stemming back the hordes. hordes a little more menacing, after all, than the corrupt city.	the city that is corrupt

the corrupt city	There are times when I think of the men out there as Roman legionaries, miles from their corrupt city, stemming back the hordes. hordes a little more menacing, after all, than the corrupt city. another blind blow at the race, furies that we passed with ovations years ago, over whose corpses we bleated triumphantly all through the Victorian era.	The corrupt city

hordes a little more menacing, after all, than the corrupt city.	There are times when I think of the men out there as Roman legionaries, miles from their corrupt city, stemming back the hordes. hordes a little more menacing, after all, than the corrupt city. another blind blow at the race, furies that we passed with ovations years ago, over whose corpses we bleated triumphantly all through the Victorian era.	The attacking forces are a bit more dangerous than the corrupt city.

bleated triumphantly all through the Victorian era.	hordes a little more menacing, after all, than the corrupt city. another blind blow at the race, furies that we passed with ovations years ago, over whose corpses we bleated triumphantly all through the Victorian era. And afterward an out-and-out materialistic world—and the Catholic Church.	Celebrated our victory throughout the Victorian era.

And afterward an out-and-out materialistic world	another blind blow at the race, furies that we passed with ovations years ago, over whose corpses we bleated triumphantly all through the Victorian era. And afterward an out-and-out materialistic world—and the Catholic Church. I wonder where you’ll fit in.	And then a completely materialistic world.

a continual referendum	I wonder where you’ll fit in. Of one thing I’m sure—Celtic you’ll live and Celtic you’ll die; so if you don’t use heaven as a continual referendum for your ideas you’ll find earth a continual recall to your ambitions. Amory, I’ve discovered suddenly that I’m an old man.	a constant vote

recall to your ambitions.	I wonder where you’ll fit in. Of one thing I’m sure—Celtic you’ll live and Celtic you’ll die; so if you don’t use heaven as a continual referendum for your ideas you’ll find earth a continual recall to your ambitions. Amory, I’ve discovered suddenly that I’m an old man.	A constant reminder of your ambitions.

came to, had no recollection of it.	Like all old men, I’ve had dreams sometimes and I’m going to tell you of them. I’ve enjoyed imagining that you were my son, that perhaps when I was young I went into a state of coma and begat you, and when I came to, had no recollection of it. it’s the paternal instinct, Amory—celibacy goes deeper than the flesh.	woke up, and didn't remember it.

the paternal instinct	I’ve enjoyed imagining that you were my son, that perhaps when I was young I went into a state of coma and begat you, and when I came to, had no recollection of it. it’s the paternal instinct, Amory—celibacy goes deeper than the flesh. Sometimes I think that the explanation of our deep resemblance is some common ancestor, and I find that the only blood that the Darcys and the O’Haras have in common is that of the O’Donahues.	The instinct to be a father.

our deep resemblance	it’s the paternal instinct, Amory—celibacy goes deeper than the flesh. Sometimes I think that the explanation of our deep resemblance is some common ancestor, and I find that the only blood that the Darcys and the O’Haras have in common is that of the O’Donahues. Stephen was his name, I think.	that we look alike

some common ancestor	it’s the paternal instinct, Amory—celibacy goes deeper than the flesh. Sometimes I think that the explanation of our deep resemblance is some common ancestor, and I find that the only blood that the Darcys and the O’Haras have in common is that of the O’Donahues. Stephen was his name, I think.	a shared ancestor

have in common is that of the O’Donahues.	it’s the paternal instinct, Amory—celibacy goes deeper than the flesh. Sometimes I think that the explanation of our deep resemblance is some common ancestor, and I find that the only blood that the Darcys and the O’Haras have in common is that of the O’Donahues. Stephen was his name, I think.	have in common is the O'Donahues'.

arrived at the port of embarkation when I got my papers to start for Rome, and I am waiting every moment to be told where to take ship.	Stephen was his name, I think. When the lightning strikes one of us it strikes both: you had hardly arrived at the port of embarkation when I got my papers to start for Rome, and I am waiting every moment to be told where to take ship. Even before you get this letter I shall be on the ocean; then will come your turn.	I got my papers to go to Rome as soon as you arrived at the port, and I'm waiting for them to tell me where my ship will leave from.

went to school and college, because it was the thing to do.	Even before you get this letter I shall be on the ocean; then will come your turn. You went to war as a gentleman should, just as you went to school and college, because it was the thing to do. It’s better to leave the blustering and tremulo-heroism to the middle classes; they do it so much better.	went to school and college because that's what people did.

leave the blustering and tremulo-heroism to the middle classes; they do it so much better.	You went to war as a gentleman should, just as you went to school and college, because it was the thing to do. It’s better to leave the blustering and tremulo-heroism to the middle classes; they do it so much better. Do you remember that weekend last March when you brought Burne Holiday from Princeton to see me?	Let the middle class do the bragging and over-the-top heroism; they're much better at it.

the blustering and tremulo-heroism	You went to war as a gentleman should, just as you went to school and college, because it was the thing to do. It’s better to leave the blustering and tremulo-heroism to the middle classes; they do it so much better. Do you remember that weekend last March when you brought Burne Holiday from Princeton to see me?	The loud boasting and overly dramatic heroism.

remember that weekend last March when you brought Burne Holiday from Princeton to see me?	It’s better to leave the blustering and tremulo-heroism to the middle classes; they do it so much better. Do you remember that weekend last March when you brought Burne Holiday from Princeton to see me? What a magnificent boy he is!	Do you remember that weekend last March when you brought Burne Holiday from Princeton to see me?

be so deceived?	What a magnificent boy he is! It gave me a frightful shock afterward when you wrote that he thought me splendid; how could he be so deceived? Splendid is the one thing that neither you nor I are.	be so wrong?

a frightful shock	What a magnificent boy he is! It gave me a frightful shock afterward when you wrote that he thought me splendid; how could he be so deceived? Splendid is the one thing that neither you nor I are.	a terrible shock

things—we’re extraordinary, we’re clever, we could be said, I suppose, to be brilliant.	Splendid is the one thing that neither you nor I are. We are many other things—we’re extraordinary, we’re clever, we could be said, I suppose, to be brilliant. We can attract people, we can make atmosphere, we can almost lose our Celtic souls in Celtic subtleties, we can almost always have our own way; but splendid—rather not!	We're extraordinary, we're clever, and I guess you could even say we're brilliant.

Celtic subtleties	We are many other things—we’re extraordinary, we’re clever, we could be said, I suppose, to be brilliant. We can attract people, we can make atmosphere, we can almost lose our Celtic souls in Celtic subtleties, we can almost always have our own way; but splendid—rather not! I am going to Rome with a wonderful dossier and letters of introduction that cover every capital in Europe, and there will be “no small stir” when I get there.	Celtic complexities

lose our Celtic souls in Celtic subtleties, we can almost always have our own way; but splendid—rather not!	We are many other things—we’re extraordinary, we’re clever, we could be said, I suppose, to be brilliant. We can attract people, we can make atmosphere, we can almost lose our Celtic souls in Celtic subtleties, we can almost always have our own way; but splendid—rather not! I am going to Rome with a wonderful dossier and letters of introduction that cover every capital in Europe, and there will be “no small stir” when I get there.	Get lost in confusing Celtic details, we can usually get what we want; but splendid—definitely not!

a wonderful dossier	We can attract people, we can make atmosphere, we can almost lose our Celtic souls in Celtic subtleties, we can almost always have our own way; but splendid—rather not! I am going to Rome with a wonderful dossier and letters of introduction that cover every capital in Europe, and there will be “no small stir” when I get there. How I wish you were with me!	A great collection of documents

no small stir	We can attract people, we can make atmosphere, we can almost lose our Celtic souls in Celtic subtleties, we can almost always have our own way; but splendid—rather not! I am going to Rome with a wonderful dossier and letters of introduction that cover every capital in Europe, and there will be “no small stir” when I get there. How I wish you were with me!	Quite a commotion

going to Rome with a wonderful dossier and letters of introduction that cover every capital in Europe, and there will be “no small stir” when I get there.	We can attract people, we can make atmosphere, we can almost lose our Celtic souls in Celtic subtleties, we can almost always have our own way; but splendid—rather not! I am going to Rome with a wonderful dossier and letters of introduction that cover every capital in Europe, and there will be “no small stir” when I get there. How I wish you were with me!	I'm going to Rome with a great set of documents and letters of introduction that will get me into every major city in Europe, and I'll cause a big commotion when I arrive.

not at all the sort	How I wish you were with me! This sounds like a rather cynical paragraph, not at all the sort of thing that a middle-aged clergyman should write to a youth about to depart for the war; the only excuse is that the middle-aged clergyman is talking to himself. There are deep things in us and you know what they are as well as I do.	Not at all the kind

a middle-aged clergyman	How I wish you were with me! This sounds like a rather cynical paragraph, not at all the sort of thing that a middle-aged clergyman should write to a youth about to depart for the war; the only excuse is that the middle-aged clergyman is talking to himself. There are deep things in us and you know what they are as well as I do.	A middle-aged clergyman.

sounds like a rather cynical paragraph, not at all the sort of thing that a middle-aged clergyman should write to a youth about to depart for the war; the only excuse is that the middle-aged clergyman is talking to himself.	How I wish you were with me! This sounds like a rather cynical paragraph, not at all the sort of thing that a middle-aged clergyman should write to a youth about to depart for the war; the only excuse is that the middle-aged clergyman is talking to himself. There are deep things in us and you know what they are as well as I do.	It sounds like a cynical paragraph, not something a middle-aged clergyman should write to a young person going to war. The only reason is that the clergyman is talking to himself.

a rather cynical paragraph	How I wish you were with me! This sounds like a rather cynical paragraph, not at all the sort of thing that a middle-aged clergyman should write to a youth about to depart for the war; the only excuse is that the middle-aged clergyman is talking to himself. There are deep things in us and you know what they are as well as I do.	A somewhat cynical paragraph.

the middle-aged clergyman	How I wish you were with me! This sounds like a rather cynical paragraph, not at all the sort of thing that a middle-aged clergyman should write to a youth about to depart for the war; the only excuse is that the middle-aged clergyman is talking to himself. There are deep things in us and you know what they are as well as I do.	The middle-aged clergyman

honesty that all our sophistry cannot destroy and, above all, a childlike simplicity that keeps us from ever being really malicious.	There are deep things in us and you know what they are as well as I do. We have great faith, though yours at present is uncrystallized; we have a terrible honesty that all our sophistry cannot destroy and, above all, a childlike simplicity that keeps us from ever being really malicious. I have written a keen for you which follows.	honesty that our clever arguments can't destroy, and most importantly, a childlike innocence that prevents us from being truly mean.

all our sophistry	There are deep things in us and you know what they are as well as I do. We have great faith, though yours at present is uncrystallized; we have a terrible honesty that all our sophistry cannot destroy and, above all, a childlike simplicity that keeps us from ever being really malicious. I have written a keen for you which follows.	all our trickery

a terrible honesty	There are deep things in us and you know what they are as well as I do. We have great faith, though yours at present is uncrystallized; we have a terrible honesty that all our sophistry cannot destroy and, above all, a childlike simplicity that keeps us from ever being really malicious. I have written a keen for you which follows.	a strong honesty

a childlike simplicity	There are deep things in us and you know what they are as well as I do. We have great faith, though yours at present is uncrystallized; we have a terrible honesty that all our sophistry cannot destroy and, above all, a childlike simplicity that keeps us from ever being really malicious. I have written a keen for you which follows.	A simple nature like a child

Lament for a Foster Son, and He Going to the War Against the King of Foreign.	I have written a keen for you which follows. I am sorry your cheeks are not up to the description I have written of them, but you will smoke and read all night— At any rate here it is: A Lament for a Foster Son, and He Going to the War Against the King of Foreign. “Ochone He is gone from me the son of my mind And he in his golden youth like Angus Oge Angus of the bright birds And his mind strong and subtle like the mind of Cuchulin on Muirtheme.	A Lament for a Foster Son, and He Going to War Against the Foreign King.

youth like Angus Oge Angus of the bright birds And his mind strong and subtle like the mind of Cuchulin on Muirtheme.	I am sorry your cheeks are not up to the description I have written of them, but you will smoke and read all night— At any rate here it is: A Lament for a Foster Son, and He Going to the War Against the King of Foreign. “Ochone He is gone from me the son of my mind And he in his golden youth like Angus Oge Angus of the bright birds And his mind strong and subtle like the mind of Cuchulin on Muirtheme. Awirra sthrue His brow is as white as the milk of the cows of Maeve And his cheeks like the cherries of the tree	youth like Angus Oge, Angus of the bright birds, and his mind strong and clever like the mind of Cuchulain on Muirthem.

cheeks like the cherries of the tree	“Ochone He is gone from me the son of my mind And he in his golden youth like Angus Oge Angus of the bright birds And his mind strong and subtle like the mind of Cuchulin on Muirtheme. Awirra sthrue His brow is as white as the milk of the cows of Maeve And his cheeks like the cherries of the tree And it bending down to Mary and she feeding the Son of God.	His cheeks are like cherries on the tree.

seas of Erin.	And it bending down to Mary and she feeding the Son of God. Aveelia Vrone His hair is like the golden collar of the Kings at Tara And his eyes like the four gray seas of Erin. And they swept with the mists of rain.	The seas of Ireland.

mists of rain.	Aveelia Vrone His hair is like the golden collar of the Kings at Tara And his eyes like the four gray seas of Erin. And they swept with the mists of rain. Mavrone go Gudyo He to be in the joyful and red battle Amongst the chieftains and they doing great deeds of valor His life to go from him It is the chords of my own soul would be loosed.	mists of rain.

great deeds	And they swept with the mists of rain. Mavrone go Gudyo He to be in the joyful and red battle Amongst the chieftains and they doing great deeds of valor His life to go from him It is the chords of my own soul would be loosed. A Vich Deelish My heart is in the heart of my son And my life is in his life surely A man can be twice young In the life of his sons only.	brave acts

the joyful and red battle	And they swept with the mists of rain. Mavrone go Gudyo He to be in the joyful and red battle Amongst the chieftains and they doing great deeds of valor His life to go from him It is the chords of my own soul would be loosed. A Vich Deelish My heart is in the heart of my son And my life is in his life surely A man can be twice young In the life of his sons only.	the joyful and red battle

doing great deeds of valor His life to go from him It is the chords of my own soul would be loosed.	And they swept with the mists of rain. Mavrone go Gudyo He to be in the joyful and red battle Amongst the chieftains and they doing great deeds of valor His life to go from him It is the chords of my own soul would be loosed. A Vich Deelish My heart is in the heart of my son And my life is in his life surely A man can be twice young In the life of his sons only.	He performed great acts of bravery, but he is going to die, and my own soul will be set free.

life of his sons only.	Mavrone go Gudyo He to be in the joyful and red battle Amongst the chieftains and they doing great deeds of valor His life to go from him It is the chords of my own soul would be loosed. A Vich Deelish My heart is in the heart of my son And my life is in his life surely A man can be twice young In the life of his sons only. Jia du Vaha Alanav May the Son of God be above him and beneath him, before him and behind him May the King of the elements cast a mist over the eyes of the King of Foreign, May the Queen of the Graces lead him by the hand the way he can go through the midst of his enemies and they not seeing him May Patrick of the Gael and Collumb of the Churches and the five thousand Saints of Erin be better than a shield to him	only in the lives of his sons.

A Vich Deelish	Mavrone go Gudyo He to be in the joyful and red battle Amongst the chieftains and they doing great deeds of valor His life to go from him It is the chords of my own soul would be loosed. A Vich Deelish My heart is in the heart of my son And my life is in his life surely A man can be twice young In the life of his sons only. Jia du Vaha Alanav May the Son of God be above him and beneath him, before him and behind him May the King of the elements cast a mist over the eyes of the King of Foreign, May the Queen of the Graces lead him by the hand the way he can go through the midst of his enemies and they not seeing him May Patrick of the Gael and Collumb of the Churches and the five thousand Saints of Erin be better than a shield to him	My darling.

Son of God be above him and beneath him, before him and behind him May the King of the elements cast a mist over the eyes of the King of Foreign, May the Queen of the Graces lead him by the hand the way he can go through the midst of his enemies and they not seeing him May Patrick of the Gael and Collumb of the Churches and the five thousand Saints of Erin be better than a shield to him	A Vich Deelish My heart is in the heart of my son And my life is in his life surely A man can be twice young In the life of his sons only. Jia du Vaha Alanav May the Son of God be above him and beneath him, before him and behind him May the King of the elements cast a mist over the eyes of the King of Foreign, May the Queen of the Graces lead him by the hand the way he can go through the midst of his enemies and they not seeing him May Patrick of the Gael and Collumb of the Churches and the five thousand Saints of Erin be better than a shield to him And he go into the fight.	May the Son of God be above him and beneath him, before him and behind him. May the King of the elements blind the King of Foreign. May the Queen of the Graces guide him so he can go through his enemies without being seen. May Patrick of the Gael, Collumb of the Churches, and the five thousand Saints of Ireland protect him.

Amory—Amory—I feel, somehow, that this is all; one or both of us is not going to last out this war.	Och Ochone.” Amory—Amory—I feel, somehow, that this is all; one or both of us is not going to last out this war. I’ve been trying to tell you how much this reincarnation of myself in you has meant in the last few years.	Amory—Amory—I feel, somehow, that this is all; one or both of us won't survive this war.

reincarnation of myself in you has meant in the last few years.	Amory—Amory—I feel, somehow, that this is all; one or both of us is not going to last out this war. I’ve been trying to tell you how much this reincarnation of myself in you has meant in the last few years. curiously alike we are.	The way I've lived on through you has meant so much to me these past few years.

moved forward on the deck until he found a stool under an electric light.	Amory moved forward on the deck until he found a stool under an electric light. He searched in his pocket for notebook and pencil and then began to write, slowly, laboriously: “We leave tonight.	He moved forward on the deck until he found a stool under an electric light.

searched in his pocket for notebook and pencil and then began to write, slowly, laboriously: “We leave tonight.	Amory moved forward on the deck until he found a stool under an electric light. He searched in his pocket for notebook and pencil and then began to write, slowly, laboriously: “We leave tonight. Silent, we filled the still, deserted street, A column of dim gray, And ghosts rose startled at the muffled beat Along the moonless way; The shadowy shipyards echoed to the feet That turned from night and day.	He looked in his pocket for a notebook and pencil and then started writing, slowly and with difficulty: "We leave tonight."

filled the still, deserted street, A column of dim gray, And ghosts rose startled at the muffled beat Along the moonless way; The shadowy shipyards echoed to the feet That turned from night and day.	He searched in his pocket for notebook and pencil and then began to write, slowly, laboriously: “We leave tonight. Silent, we filled the still, deserted street, A column of dim gray, And ghosts rose startled at the muffled beat Along the moonless way; The shadowy shipyards echoed to the feet That turned from night and day. And so we linger on the windless decks, See on the spectre shore Shades of a thousand days, poor gray-ribbed wrecks.	We filled the quiet, empty street, a line of faint gray. Ghosts were startled by the muffled sounds along the dark path. The shadowy shipyards echoed with our footsteps as we left the world of light and day.

the moonless way	He searched in his pocket for notebook and pencil and then began to write, slowly, laboriously: “We leave tonight. Silent, we filled the still, deserted street, A column of dim gray, And ghosts rose startled at the muffled beat Along the moonless way; The shadowy shipyards echoed to the feet That turned from night and day. And so we linger on the windless decks, See on the spectre shore Shades of a thousand days, poor gray-ribbed wrecks.	the path without a moon

the still, deserted street	He searched in his pocket for notebook and pencil and then began to write, slowly, laboriously: “We leave tonight. Silent, we filled the still, deserted street, A column of dim gray, And ghosts rose startled at the muffled beat Along the moonless way; The shadowy shipyards echoed to the feet That turned from night and day. And so we linger on the windless decks, See on the spectre shore Shades of a thousand days, poor gray-ribbed wrecks.	The quiet, empty street

the muffled beat	He searched in his pocket for notebook and pencil and then began to write, slowly, laboriously: “We leave tonight. Silent, we filled the still, deserted street, A column of dim gray, And ghosts rose startled at the muffled beat Along the moonless way; The shadowy shipyards echoed to the feet That turned from night and day. And so we linger on the windless decks, See on the spectre shore Shades of a thousand days, poor gray-ribbed wrecks.	the muffled sound

The shadowy shipyards	He searched in his pocket for notebook and pencil and then began to write, slowly, laboriously: “We leave tonight. Silent, we filled the still, deserted street, A column of dim gray, And ghosts rose startled at the muffled beat Along the moonless way; The shadowy shipyards echoed to the feet That turned from night and day. And so we linger on the windless decks, See on the spectre shore Shades of a thousand days, poor gray-ribbed wrecks.	The dark shipyards

poor gray-ribbed wrecks	Silent, we filled the still, deserted street, A column of dim gray, And ghosts rose startled at the muffled beat Along the moonless way; The shadowy shipyards echoed to the feet That turned from night and day. And so we linger on the windless decks, See on the spectre shore Shades of a thousand days, poor gray-ribbed wrecks. Oh, shall we then deplore Those futile years!	Poor, gray, broken-down remains.

the spectre shore Shades	Silent, we filled the still, deserted street, A column of dim gray, And ghosts rose startled at the muffled beat Along the moonless way; The shadowy shipyards echoed to the feet That turned from night and day. And so we linger on the windless decks, See on the spectre shore Shades of a thousand days, poor gray-ribbed wrecks. Oh, shall we then deplore Those futile years!	the ghostly shore shades

linger on the windless decks, See on the spectre shore Shades of a thousand days, poor gray-ribbed wrecks.	Silent, we filled the still, deserted street, A column of dim gray, And ghosts rose startled at the muffled beat Along the moonless way; The shadowy shipyards echoed to the feet That turned from night and day. And so we linger on the windless decks, See on the spectre shore Shades of a thousand days, poor gray-ribbed wrecks. Oh, shall we then deplore Those futile years!	Stay on the still decks, and see on the ghostly shore shadows of a thousand days, like sad, old shipwrecks.

the windless decks	Silent, we filled the still, deserted street, A column of dim gray, And ghosts rose startled at the muffled beat Along the moonless way; The shadowy shipyards echoed to the feet That turned from night and day. And so we linger on the windless decks, See on the spectre shore Shades of a thousand days, poor gray-ribbed wrecks. Oh, shall we then deplore Those futile years!	the still decks

Those futile years	And so we linger on the windless decks, See on the spectre shore Shades of a thousand days, poor gray-ribbed wrecks. Oh, shall we then deplore Those futile years! See how the sea is white!	Those wasted years

gravelled light	See how the sea is white! The clouds have broken and the heavens burn To hollow highways, paved with gravelled light The churning of the waves about the stern Rises to one voluminous nocturne, We leave tonight.” A letter from Amory, headed “Brest, March 11th, 1919,” to Lieutenant T. P. D’Invilliers, Camp Gordon, Ga.	light like gravel

churning of the waves about the stern Rises to one voluminous nocturne, We leave tonight.”	See how the sea is white! The clouds have broken and the heavens burn To hollow highways, paved with gravelled light The churning of the waves about the stern Rises to one voluminous nocturne, We leave tonight.” A letter from Amory, headed “Brest, March 11th, 1919,” to Lieutenant T. P. D’Invilliers, Camp Gordon, Ga.	The waves are churning around the back of the ship, rising into a huge night song. We leave tonight.

one voluminous nocturne	See how the sea is white! The clouds have broken and the heavens burn To hollow highways, paved with gravelled light The churning of the waves about the stern Rises to one voluminous nocturne, We leave tonight.” A letter from Amory, headed “Brest, March 11th, 1919,” to Lieutenant T. P. D’Invilliers, Camp Gordon, Ga.	a single, large night song

letter from Amory, headed “Brest, March 11th, 1919,” to Lieutenant T. P. D’Invilliers, Camp Gordon, Ga.	The clouds have broken and the heavens burn To hollow highways, paved with gravelled light The churning of the waves about the stern Rises to one voluminous nocturne, We leave tonight.” A letter from Amory, headed “Brest, March 11th, 1919,” to Lieutenant T. P. D’Invilliers, Camp Gordon, Ga. Dear Baudelaire: We meet in Manhattan on the 30th of this very mo.; we then proceed to take a very sporty apartment, you and I and Alec, who is at me elbow as I write.	A letter from Amory, dated "Brest, March 11th, 1919," to Lieutenant T. P. D'Invilliers, Camp Gordon, Georgia.

Lieutenant T. P. D’Invilliers	The clouds have broken and the heavens burn To hollow highways, paved with gravelled light The churning of the waves about the stern Rises to one voluminous nocturne, We leave tonight.” A letter from Amory, headed “Brest, March 11th, 1919,” to Lieutenant T. P. D’Invilliers, Camp Gordon, Ga. Dear Baudelaire: We meet in Manhattan on the 30th of this very mo.; we then proceed to take a very sporty apartment, you and I and Alec, who is at me elbow as I write.	To Lieutenant T. P. D’Invilliers

a very sporty apartment	A letter from Amory, headed “Brest, March 11th, 1919,” to Lieutenant T. P. D’Invilliers, Camp Gordon, Ga. Dear Baudelaire: We meet in Manhattan on the 30th of this very mo.; we then proceed to take a very sporty apartment, you and I and Alec, who is at me elbow as I write. I don’t know what I’m going to do	a very stylish apartment

30th of this very mo.; we then proceed to take a very sporty apartment, you and I and Alec, who is at me elbow as I write.	A letter from Amory, headed “Brest, March 11th, 1919,” to Lieutenant T. P. D’Invilliers, Camp Gordon, Ga. Dear Baudelaire: We meet in Manhattan on the 30th of this very mo.; we then proceed to take a very sporty apartment, you and I and Alec, who is at me elbow as I write. I don’t know what I’m going to do	30th of this month; we will then get a very nice apartment, you, I, and Alec, who is beside me as I write.

going into politics.	I don’t know what I’m going to do but I have a vague dream of going into politics. Why is it that the pick of the young Englishmen from Oxford and Cambridge go into politics and in the U.S.A. we leave it to the muckers?—raised in the ward, educated in the assembly and sent to Congress, fat-paunched bundles of corruption, devoid of “both ideas and ideals” as the debaters used to say.	Going into politics.

a vague dream	I don’t know what I’m going to do but I have a vague dream of going into politics. Why is it that the pick of the young Englishmen from Oxford and Cambridge go into politics and in the U.S.A. we leave it to the muckers?—raised in the ward, educated in the assembly and sent to Congress, fat-paunched bundles of corruption, devoid of “both ideas and ideals” as the debaters used to say.	a hazy dream

fat-paunched bundles	but I have a vague dream of going into politics. Why is it that the pick of the young Englishmen from Oxford and Cambridge go into politics and in the U.S.A. we leave it to the muckers?—raised in the ward, educated in the assembly and sent to Congress, fat-paunched bundles of corruption, devoid of “both ideas and ideals” as the debaters used to say. Even forty years ago we had good men in politics, but we, we are brought up to pile up a million and “show what we are made of.”	Overweight, corrupt people

the young Englishmen	but I have a vague dream of going into politics. Why is it that the pick of the young Englishmen from Oxford and Cambridge go into politics and in the U.S.A. we leave it to the muckers?—raised in the ward, educated in the assembly and sent to Congress, fat-paunched bundles of corruption, devoid of “both ideas and ideals” as the debaters used to say. Even forty years ago we had good men in politics, but we, we are brought up to pile up a million and “show what we are made of.”	Young English people

men in politics, but we, we are brought up to pile up a million and “show what we are made of.”	Why is it that the pick of the young Englishmen from Oxford and Cambridge go into politics and in the U.S.A. we leave it to the muckers?—raised in the ward, educated in the assembly and sent to Congress, fat-paunched bundles of corruption, devoid of “both ideas and ideals” as the debaters used to say. Even forty years ago we had good men in politics, but we, we are brought up to pile up a million and “show what we are made of.” Sometimes I wish I’d been an Englishman; American life is so damned dumb and stupid and healthy.	men in politics, but we are raised to make a million dollars and "show what we are made of."

poor Beatrice	Sometimes I wish I’d been an Englishman; American life is so damned dumb and stupid and healthy. Since poor Beatrice died I’ll probably have a little money, but very darn little. I can forgive mother almost everything except the fact that in a sudden burst of religiosity toward the end, she left half of what remained to be spent in stained-glass windows and seminary endowments.	Beatrice, who has died

have a little money, but very darn little.	Sometimes I wish I’d been an Englishman; American life is so damned dumb and stupid and healthy. Since poor Beatrice died I’ll probably have a little money, but very darn little. I can forgive mother almost everything except the fact that in a sudden burst of religiosity toward the end, she left half of what remained to be spent in stained-glass windows and seminary endowments.	I'll have a little money, but not much.

burst of religiosity toward the end, she left half of what remained to be spent in stained-glass windows and seminary endowments.	Since poor Beatrice died I’ll probably have a little money, but very darn little. I can forgive mother almost everything except the fact that in a sudden burst of religiosity toward the end, she left half of what remained to be spent in stained-glass windows and seminary endowments. Mr. Barton, my lawyer, writes me that my thousands are mostly in street railways and that the said Street R.R.s are losing money because of the five-cent fares.	When she became very religious at the end of her life, she gave half of the remaining money to stained-glass windows and to support a religious school.

stained-glass windows	Since poor Beatrice died I’ll probably have a little money, but very darn little. I can forgive mother almost everything except the fact that in a sudden burst of religiosity toward the end, she left half of what remained to be spent in stained-glass windows and seminary endowments. Mr. Barton, my lawyer, writes me that my thousands are mostly in street railways and that the said Street R.R.s are losing money because of the five-cent fares.	stained-glass windows

seminary endowments	Since poor Beatrice died I’ll probably have a little money, but very darn little. I can forgive mother almost everything except the fact that in a sudden burst of religiosity toward the end, she left half of what remained to be spent in stained-glass windows and seminary endowments. Mr. Barton, my lawyer, writes me that my thousands are mostly in street railways and that the said Street R.R.s are losing money because of the five-cent fares.	Money given to a religious school

are mostly in street railways and that the said Street R.R.s are losing money because of the five-cent fares.	I can forgive mother almost everything except the fact that in a sudden burst of religiosity toward the end, she left half of what remained to be spent in stained-glass windows and seminary endowments. Mr. Barton, my lawyer, writes me that my thousands are mostly in street railways and that the said Street R.R.s are losing money because of the five-cent fares. Imagine a salary list that gives $350 a month to a man that can’t read and write!—yet	are mainly invested in street railways, and those street railways are losing money because of the five-cent fares.

the said Street R.R.s	I can forgive mother almost everything except the fact that in a sudden burst of religiosity toward the end, she left half of what remained to be spent in stained-glass windows and seminary endowments. Mr. Barton, my lawyer, writes me that my thousands are mostly in street railways and that the said Street R.R.s are losing money because of the five-cent fares. Imagine a salary list that gives $350 a month to a man that can’t read and write!—yet	those Street R.R.s

man that can’t read and write!—yet	Mr. Barton, my lawyer, writes me that my thousands are mostly in street railways and that the said Street R.R.s are losing money because of the five-cent fares. Imagine a salary list that gives $350 a month to a man that can’t read and write!—yet I believe in it, even though I’ve seen what was once a sizable fortune melt away between speculation, extravagance, the democratic administration, and the income tax—modern, that’s me all over, Mabel.	a man who can't read or write!—but

’s me all over, Mabel.	Imagine a salary list that gives $350 a month to a man that can’t read and write!—yet I believe in it, even though I’ve seen what was once a sizable fortune melt away between speculation, extravagance, the democratic administration, and the income tax—modern, that’s me all over, Mabel. At any rate we’ll have really knockout rooms—you can get a job on some fashion magazine, and Alec can go into the Zinc Company or whatever it is that his people own—he’s looking over my shoulder and he says it’s a brass company, but I don’t think it matters much, do you?	That's just like me, Mabel.

have really knockout rooms—you can get a job on some fashion magazine, and Alec can go into the Zinc Company or whatever it is that his people own—he’s looking over my shoulder and he says it’s a brass company, but I don’t think it matters much, do you?	I believe in it, even though I’ve seen what was once a sizable fortune melt away between speculation, extravagance, the democratic administration, and the income tax—modern, that’s me all over, Mabel. At any rate we’ll have really knockout rooms—you can get a job on some fashion magazine, and Alec can go into the Zinc Company or whatever it is that his people own—he’s looking over my shoulder and he says it’s a brass company, but I don’t think it matters much, do you? There’s probably as much corruption in zinc-made money as brass-made money.	We'll have amazing rooms, you can get a job at a fashion magazine, and Alec can work at the Zinc Company or whatever company his family owns. He's looking over my shoulder and says it's a brass company, but I don't think it matters, do you?

really knockout rooms	I believe in it, even though I’ve seen what was once a sizable fortune melt away between speculation, extravagance, the democratic administration, and the income tax—modern, that’s me all over, Mabel. At any rate we’ll have really knockout rooms—you can get a job on some fashion magazine, and Alec can go into the Zinc Company or whatever it is that his people own—he’s looking over my shoulder and he says it’s a brass company, but I don’t think it matters much, do you? There’s probably as much corruption in zinc-made money as brass-made money.	Really amazing rooms

corruption in zinc-made money as brass-made money.	At any rate we’ll have really knockout rooms—you can get a job on some fashion magazine, and Alec can go into the Zinc Company or whatever it is that his people own—he’s looking over my shoulder and he says it’s a brass company, but I don’t think it matters much, do you? There’s probably as much corruption in zinc-made money as brass-made money. As for the well-known Amory, he would write immortal literature if he were sure enough about anything to risk telling anyone else about it.	Corruption is probably the same in money made from zinc as in money made from brass.

the well-known Amory	There’s probably as much corruption in zinc-made money as brass-made money. As for the well-known Amory, he would write immortal literature if he were sure enough about anything to risk telling anyone else about it. There is no more dangerous gift to posterity than a few cleverly turned platitudes.	The famous Amory

write immortal literature if he were sure enough about anything to risk telling anyone else about it.	There’s probably as much corruption in zinc-made money as brass-made money. As for the well-known Amory, he would write immortal literature if he were sure enough about anything to risk telling anyone else about it. There is no more dangerous gift to posterity than a few cleverly turned platitudes.	He would write great books if he were confident enough to share his ideas.

immortal literature	There’s probably as much corruption in zinc-made money as brass-made money. As for the well-known Amory, he would write immortal literature if he were sure enough about anything to risk telling anyone else about it. There is no more dangerous gift to posterity than a few cleverly turned platitudes.	Timeless writing

gift to posterity than a few cleverly turned platitudes.	As for the well-known Amory, he would write immortal literature if he were sure enough about anything to risk telling anyone else about it. There is no more dangerous gift to posterity than a few cleverly turned platitudes. Tom, why don’t you become a Catholic?	Nothing is more harmful to future generations than a few clever but meaningless sayings.

the sporty churches	Tom, why don’t you become a Catholic? Of course to be a good one you’d have to give up those violent intrigues you used to tell me about, but you’d write better poetry if you were linked up to tall golden candlesticks and long, even chants, and even if the American priests are rather burgeois, as Beatrice used to say, still you need only go to the sporty churches, and I’ll introduce you to Monsignor Darcy who really is a wonder. Kerry’s death was a blow, so was Jesse’s to a certain extent.	The churches for athletic people.

tall golden candlesticks	Tom, why don’t you become a Catholic? Of course to be a good one you’d have to give up those violent intrigues you used to tell me about, but you’d write better poetry if you were linked up to tall golden candlesticks and long, even chants, and even if the American priests are rather burgeois, as Beatrice used to say, still you need only go to the sporty churches, and I’ll introduce you to Monsignor Darcy who really is a wonder. Kerry’s death was a blow, so was Jesse’s to a certain extent.	Tall golden candlesticks.

are rather burgeois, as Beatrice used to say, still you need only go to the sporty churches, and I’ll introduce you to Monsignor Darcy who really is a wonder.	Tom, why don’t you become a Catholic? Of course to be a good one you’d have to give up those violent intrigues you used to tell me about, but you’d write better poetry if you were linked up to tall golden candlesticks and long, even chants, and even if the American priests are rather burgeois, as Beatrice used to say, still you need only go to the sporty churches, and I’ll introduce you to Monsignor Darcy who really is a wonder. Kerry’s death was a blow, so was Jesse’s to a certain extent.	are rather middle-class, as Beatrice used to say, still you only need to go to the fashionable churches, and I'll introduce you to Monsignor Darcy who is truly amazing.

those violent intrigues	Tom, why don’t you become a Catholic? Of course to be a good one you’d have to give up those violent intrigues you used to tell me about, but you’d write better poetry if you were linked up to tall golden candlesticks and long, even chants, and even if the American priests are rather burgeois, as Beatrice used to say, still you need only go to the sporty churches, and I’ll introduce you to Monsignor Darcy who really is a wonder. Kerry’s death was a blow, so was Jesse’s to a certain extent.	those violent schemes

Kerry’s death	Of course to be a good one you’d have to give up those violent intrigues you used to tell me about, but you’d write better poetry if you were linked up to tall golden candlesticks and long, even chants, and even if the American priests are rather burgeois, as Beatrice used to say, still you need only go to the sporty churches, and I’ll introduce you to Monsignor Darcy who really is a wonder. Kerry’s death was a blow, so was Jesse’s to a certain extent. And I have a great curiosity to know what queer corner of the world has swallowed Burne.	Kerry died.

Jesse’s to a certain extent.	Of course to be a good one you’d have to give up those violent intrigues you used to tell me about, but you’d write better poetry if you were linked up to tall golden candlesticks and long, even chants, and even if the American priests are rather burgeois, as Beatrice used to say, still you need only go to the sporty churches, and I’ll introduce you to Monsignor Darcy who really is a wonder. Kerry’s death was a blow, so was Jesse’s to a certain extent. And I have a great curiosity to know what queer corner of the world has swallowed Burne.	Jesse's death was also hard to deal with.

what queer corner	Kerry’s death was a blow, so was Jesse’s to a certain extent. And I have a great curiosity to know what queer corner of the world has swallowed Burne. Do you suppose he’s in prison under some false name?	What strange place

curiosity to know what queer corner of the world has swallowed Burne.	Kerry’s death was a blow, so was Jesse’s to a certain extent. And I have a great curiosity to know what queer corner of the world has swallowed Burne. Do you suppose he’s in prison under some false name?	I'm curious to know where in the world Burne has disappeared to.

a great curiosity	Kerry’s death was a blow, so was Jesse’s to a certain extent. And I have a great curiosity to know what queer corner of the world has swallowed Burne. Do you suppose he’s in prison under some false name?	I really want to know

’s in prison under some false name?	And I have a great curiosity to know what queer corner of the world has swallowed Burne. Do you suppose he’s in prison under some false name? I confess that the war instead of making me orthodox, which is the correct reaction, has made me a passionate agnostic.	Is he in prison under a fake name?

war instead of making me orthodox, which is the correct reaction, has made me a passionate agnostic.	Do you suppose he’s in prison under some false name? I confess that the war instead of making me orthodox, which is the correct reaction, has made me a passionate agnostic. The Catholic Church has had its wings clipped so often lately that its part was timidly negligible, and they haven’t any good writers any more.	The war, rather than making me religiously traditional, as it should, has turned me into a very strong agnostic.

sick of Chesterton.	The Catholic Church has had its wings clipped so often lately that its part was timidly negligible, and they haven’t any good writers any more. I’m sick of Chesterton. I’ve only discovered one soldier who passed through the much-advertised spiritual crisis, like this fellow, Donald Hankey, and the one I knew was already studying for the ministry, so he was ripe for it.	I'm tired of Chesterton.

soldier who passed through the much-advertised spiritual crisis, like this fellow, Donald Hankey, and the one I knew was already studying for the ministry, so he was ripe for it.	I’m sick of Chesterton. I’ve only discovered one soldier who passed through the much-advertised spiritual crisis, like this fellow, Donald Hankey, and the one I knew was already studying for the ministry, so he was ripe for it. I honestly think that’s all pretty much rot, though it seemed to give sentimental comfort to those at home; and may make fathers and mothers appreciate their children.	The soldier who had the famous spiritual crisis, like Donald Hankey, and the one I knew was already planning to become a minister, so he was ready for it.

sentimental comfort	I’ve only discovered one soldier who passed through the much-advertised spiritual crisis, like this fellow, Donald Hankey, and the one I knew was already studying for the ministry, so he was ripe for it. I honestly think that’s all pretty much rot, though it seemed to give sentimental comfort to those at home; and may make fathers and mothers appreciate their children. This crisis-inspired religion is rather valueless and fleeting at best.	comforting feelings

seemed to give sentimental comfort to those at home; and may make fathers and mothers appreciate their children.	I’ve only discovered one soldier who passed through the much-advertised spiritual crisis, like this fellow, Donald Hankey, and the one I knew was already studying for the ministry, so he was ripe for it. I honestly think that’s all pretty much rot, though it seemed to give sentimental comfort to those at home; and may make fathers and mothers appreciate their children. This crisis-inspired religion is rather valueless and fleeting at best.	It probably made people at home feel better and might help parents value their children more.

This crisis-inspired religion	I honestly think that’s all pretty much rot, though it seemed to give sentimental comfort to those at home; and may make fathers and mothers appreciate their children. This crisis-inspired religion is rather valueless and fleeting at best. I think four men have discovered Paris to one that discovered God.	This religion that came about because of the crisis

a contemplative, emotionless life	I think four men have discovered Paris to one that discovered God. But us—you and me and Alec—oh, we’ll get a Jap butler and dress for dinner and have wine on the table and lead a contemplative, emotionless life until we decide to use machine-guns with the property owners—or throw bombs with the Bolshevik. God!	A thoughtful, unemotional life

a Jap butler	I think four men have discovered Paris to one that discovered God. But us—you and me and Alec—oh, we’ll get a Jap butler and dress for dinner and have wine on the table and lead a contemplative, emotionless life until we decide to use machine-guns with the property owners—or throw bombs with the Bolshevik. God!	a Japanese butler

decide to use machine-guns with the property owners—or throw bombs with the Bolshevik.	I think four men have discovered Paris to one that discovered God. But us—you and me and Alec—oh, we’ll get a Jap butler and dress for dinner and have wine on the table and lead a contemplative, emotionless life until we decide to use machine-guns with the property owners—or throw bombs with the Bolshevik. God!	decide to use machine guns against the property owners—or throw bombs with the Bolsheviks.

falling in love and growing domestic.	Tom, I hope something happens. I’m restless as the devil and have a horror of getting fat or falling in love and growing domestic. The place at Lake Geneva is now for rent but when I land I’m going West to see Mr. Barton and get some details.	Falling in love and settling down.

is now for rent but when I land I’m going West to see Mr. Barton and get some details.	I’m restless as the devil and have a horror of getting fat or falling in love and growing domestic. The place at Lake Geneva is now for rent but when I land I’m going West to see Mr. Barton and get some details. Write me care of the Blackstone, Chicago.	is now available to rent, and when I arrive, I'm going West to see Mr. Barton to get more information.

care of the Blackstone, Chicago.	The place at Lake Geneva is now for rent but when I land I’m going West to see Mr. Barton and get some details. Write me care of the Blackstone, Chicago. S’ever, dear Boswell, Samuel Johnson.	Please send mail to me at the Blackstone Hotel, Chicago.

S’ever, dear Boswell, Samuel Johnson	Write me care of the Blackstone, Chicago. S’ever, dear Boswell, Samuel Johnson.	Sincerely, dear Boswell, Samuel Johnson

pageantry and carnival of rich dusk and dim streets.	Amory wandered slowly up the avenue and thought of the night as inevitably his—the pageantry and carnival of rich dusk and dim streets. it seemed that he had closed the book of fading harmonies at last and stepped into the sensuous vibrant walks of life.	The show and excitement of the dark, fancy streets.

rich dusk	Amory wandered slowly up the avenue and thought of the night as inevitably his—the pageantry and carnival of rich dusk and dim streets. it seemed that he had closed the book of fading harmonies at last and stepped into the sensuous vibrant walks of life.	Darkness of wealth

his—the pageantry	Amory wandered slowly up the avenue and thought of the night as inevitably his—the pageantry and carnival of rich dusk and dim streets. it seemed that he had closed the book of fading harmonies at last and stepped into the sensuous vibrant walks of life.	his—the show

the sensuous vibrant walks	Amory wandered slowly up the avenue and thought of the night as inevitably his—the pageantry and carnival of rich dusk and dim streets. it seemed that he had closed the book of fading harmonies at last and stepped into the sensuous vibrant walks of life. Everywhere these countless lights, this promise of a night of streets and singing—he moved in a half-dream through the crowd as if expecting to meet Rosalind hurrying toward him with eager feet from every corner.	the exciting and lively streets

stepped into the sensuous vibrant walks of life.	Amory wandered slowly up the avenue and thought of the night as inevitably his—the pageantry and carnival of rich dusk and dim streets. it seemed that he had closed the book of fading harmonies at last and stepped into the sensuous vibrant walks of life. Everywhere these countless lights, this promise of a night of streets and singing—he moved in a half-dream through the crowd as if expecting to meet Rosalind hurrying toward him with eager feet from every corner.	Started living the exciting and lively parts of life.

fading harmonies	Amory wandered slowly up the avenue and thought of the night as inevitably his—the pageantry and carnival of rich dusk and dim streets. it seemed that he had closed the book of fading harmonies at last and stepped into the sensuous vibrant walks of life. Everywhere these countless lights, this promise of a night of streets and singing—he moved in a half-dream through the crowd as if expecting to meet Rosalind hurrying toward him with eager feet from every corner.	fading beauty

eager feet	it seemed that he had closed the book of fading harmonies at last and stepped into the sensuous vibrant walks of life. Everywhere these countless lights, this promise of a night of streets and singing—he moved in a half-dream through the crowd as if expecting to meet Rosalind hurrying toward him with eager feet from every corner. How the unforgettable faces of dusk would blend to her, the myriad footsteps, a thousand overtures, would blend to her footsteps; and there would be more drunkenness than wine in the softness of her eyes on his.	eager feet

night of streets and singing—he moved in a half-dream through the crowd as if expecting to meet Rosalind hurrying toward him with eager feet from every corner.	it seemed that he had closed the book of fading harmonies at last and stepped into the sensuous vibrant walks of life. Everywhere these countless lights, this promise of a night of streets and singing—he moved in a half-dream through the crowd as if expecting to meet Rosalind hurrying toward him with eager feet from every corner. How the unforgettable faces of dusk would blend to her, the myriad footsteps, a thousand overtures, would blend to her footsteps; and there would be more drunkenness than wine in the softness of her eyes on his.	He moved through the crowd like he was half-asleep, as if he expected to see Rosalind coming towards him quickly from every direction.

the unforgettable faces	Everywhere these countless lights, this promise of a night of streets and singing—he moved in a half-dream through the crowd as if expecting to meet Rosalind hurrying toward him with eager feet from every corner. How the unforgettable faces of dusk would blend to her, the myriad footsteps, a thousand overtures, would blend to her footsteps; and there would be more drunkenness than wine in the softness of her eyes on his. Even his dreams now were faint violins drifting like summer sounds upon the summer air.	The unforgettable faces

blend to her, the myriad footsteps, a thousand overtures, would blend to her footsteps; and there would be more drunkenness than wine in the softness of her eyes on his.	Everywhere these countless lights, this promise of a night of streets and singing—he moved in a half-dream through the crowd as if expecting to meet Rosalind hurrying toward him with eager feet from every corner. How the unforgettable faces of dusk would blend to her, the myriad footsteps, a thousand overtures, would blend to her footsteps; and there would be more drunkenness than wine in the softness of her eyes on his. Even his dreams now were faint violins drifting like summer sounds upon the summer air.	The many footsteps and countless invitations would become her footsteps; and he would see more love than sobriety in the softness of her eyes.

more drunkenness	Everywhere these countless lights, this promise of a night of streets and singing—he moved in a half-dream through the crowd as if expecting to meet Rosalind hurrying toward him with eager feet from every corner. How the unforgettable faces of dusk would blend to her, the myriad footsteps, a thousand overtures, would blend to her footsteps; and there would be more drunkenness than wine in the softness of her eyes on his. Even his dreams now were faint violins drifting like summer sounds upon the summer air.	more excitement

a thousand overtures	Everywhere these countless lights, this promise of a night of streets and singing—he moved in a half-dream through the crowd as if expecting to meet Rosalind hurrying toward him with eager feet from every corner. How the unforgettable faces of dusk would blend to her, the myriad footsteps, a thousand overtures, would blend to her footsteps; and there would be more drunkenness than wine in the softness of her eyes on his. Even his dreams now were faint violins drifting like summer sounds upon the summer air.	a thousand invitations

the myriad footsteps	Everywhere these countless lights, this promise of a night of streets and singing—he moved in a half-dream through the crowd as if expecting to meet Rosalind hurrying toward him with eager feet from every corner. How the unforgettable faces of dusk would blend to her, the myriad footsteps, a thousand overtures, would blend to her footsteps; and there would be more drunkenness than wine in the softness of her eyes on his. Even his dreams now were faint violins drifting like summer sounds upon the summer air.	the many footsteps

faint violins	How the unforgettable faces of dusk would blend to her, the myriad footsteps, a thousand overtures, would blend to her footsteps; and there would be more drunkenness than wine in the softness of her eyes on his. Even his dreams now were faint violins drifting like summer sounds upon the summer air. The room was in darkness except for the faint glow of Tom’s cigarette where he lounged by the open window.	Faint violins

violins drifting like summer sounds upon the summer air.	How the unforgettable faces of dusk would blend to her, the myriad footsteps, a thousand overtures, would blend to her footsteps; and there would be more drunkenness than wine in the softness of her eyes on his. Even his dreams now were faint violins drifting like summer sounds upon the summer air. The room was in darkness except for the faint glow of Tom’s cigarette where he lounged by the open window.	Violins drifting like summer sounds in the summer air.

the faint glow	Even his dreams now were faint violins drifting like summer sounds upon the summer air. The room was in darkness except for the faint glow of Tom’s cigarette where he lounged by the open window. As the door shut behind him, Amory stood a moment with his back against it.	The dim light

glow of Tom’s cigarette where he lounged by the open window.	Even his dreams now were faint violins drifting like summer sounds upon the summer air. The room was in darkness except for the faint glow of Tom’s cigarette where he lounged by the open window. As the door shut behind him, Amory stood a moment with his back against it.	The glow of Tom's cigarette where he was relaxing by the open window.

Tom’s cigarette	Even his dreams now were faint violins drifting like summer sounds upon the summer air. The room was in darkness except for the faint glow of Tom’s cigarette where he lounged by the open window. As the door shut behind him, Amory stood a moment with his back against it.	Tom's cigarette

shut behind him, Amory stood a moment with his back against it.	The room was in darkness except for the faint glow of Tom’s cigarette where he lounged by the open window. As the door shut behind him, Amory stood a moment with his back against it. “Hello, Benvenuto Blaine.	After the door closed, Amory stood there for a moment, leaning against it.

“Hello, Benvenuto Blaine	As the door shut behind him, Amory stood a moment with his back against it. “Hello, Benvenuto Blaine. How went the advertising business today?”	Hello, Benvenuto Blaine.

sprawled on a couch.	How went the advertising business today?” Amory sprawled on a couch. “I loathed it as usual!”	He sprawled on a couch.

loathed it as usual!”	Amory sprawled on a couch. “I loathed it as usual!” The momentary vision of the bustling agency was displaced quickly by another picture.	I hated it as usual!

the bustling agency	“I loathed it as usual!” The momentary vision of the bustling agency was displaced quickly by another picture. “My God!	The busy agency

vision of the bustling agency was displaced quickly by another picture.	“I loathed it as usual!” The momentary vision of the bustling agency was displaced quickly by another picture. “My God!	The image of the busy agency quickly disappeared, replaced by another image.

The momentary vision	“I loathed it as usual!” The momentary vision of the bustling agency was displaced quickly by another picture. “My God!	The brief image

came from the window—quite a resigned sigh.	I don’t want anyone to know.” Another sigh came from the window—quite a resigned sigh. “She’s life and hope and happiness, my whole world now.”	The sigh came from the window, sounding very resigned.

quiver of a tear on his eyelid.	“She’s life and hope and happiness, my whole world now.” He felt the quiver of a tear on his eyelid. “Oh, golly, Tom!”	A tear trembling on his eyelid.

“Oh, golly	He felt the quiver of a tear on his eyelid. “Oh, golly, Tom!”	“Oh, gosh!”

do,” she whispered.	“Sit like we do,” she whispered. He sat in the big chair and held out his arms so that she could nestle inside them.	Do," she whispered.

nestle inside them.	“Sit like we do,” she whispered. He sat in the big chair and held out his arms so that she could nestle inside them. “I knew you’d come tonight,” she said softly, “like summer, just when I needed you most.	snuggle in them.

said softly, “like summer, just when I needed you most.	He sat in the big chair and held out his arms so that she could nestle inside them. “I knew you’d come tonight,” she said softly, “like summer, just when I needed you most. darling.	She said softly, "Like summer, just when I needed you most."

moved lazily over her face.	darling.” His lips moved lazily over her face. “You taste so good,” he sighed.	moved slowly across her face.

ready for me I’ll marry you.”	he held her closer. “Amory,” she whispered, “when you’re ready for me I’ll marry you.” “We won’t have much at first.”	When you're ready, I'll marry you.

reproach yourself for what you can’t give me.	she cried. “It hurts when you reproach yourself for what you can’t give me. I’ve got your precious self—and that’s enough for me.”	Blame yourself for not being able to give me something.

love you, Amory, with all my heart.”	“Yes, but I want to hear you say it.” “I love you, Amory, with all my heart.” “Always, will you?”	I love you, Amory, with all my heart.

life—Oh, Amory—” “What?”	“Always, will you?” “All my life—Oh, Amory—” “What?” “I want to belong to you.	Life—Oh, Amory—” “What?”

—Oh, Amory	“Always, will you?” “All my life—Oh, Amory—” “What?” “I want to belong to you.	—Oh, Amory

laugh at me, Amory.	“But I haven’t any people.” “Don’t laugh at me, Amory. Just kiss me.”	Don't laugh at me, Amory.

looked at him dreamily.	Wouldn’t it be awful if this was—was the high point?.” She looked at him dreamily. “Beauty and love pass, I know.	She looked at him dreamily.

scent of roses and then the death of roses—” “Beauty means the agony of sacrifice and the end of agony.”	I suppose all great happiness is a little sad. Beauty means the scent of roses and then the death of roses—” “Beauty means the agony of sacrifice and the end of agony.” “And, Amory, we’re beautiful, I know.	The smell of roses followed by the death of roses.” “Beauty means the pain of sacrifice and then the end of that pain.”

regret all the other kisses; now I know how much a kiss can mean.”	Amory, I belong to you. For the first time I regret all the other kisses; now I know how much a kiss can mean.” Then they would smoke and he would tell her about his day at the office—and where they might live.	I regret all the other kisses; now I understand how much a kiss can mean.

tell her about his day at the office—and where they might live.	For the first time I regret all the other kisses; now I know how much a kiss can mean.” Then they would smoke and he would tell her about his day at the office—and where they might live. Sometimes, when he was particularly loquacious, she went to sleep in his arms, but he loved that Rosalind—all Rosalinds—as he had never in the world loved anyone else.	tell her about his workday and where they could live.

Rosalind—all Rosalinds—as he had never in the world loved anyone else.	Then they would smoke and he would tell her about his day at the office—and where they might live. Sometimes, when he was particularly loquacious, she went to sleep in his arms, but he loved that Rosalind—all Rosalinds—as he had never in the world loved anyone else. Intangibly fleeting, unrememberable hours.	He loved Rosalind, and all the different versions of her, more than he had ever loved anyone.

Intangibly fleeting, unrememberable hours	Sometimes, when he was particularly loquacious, she went to sleep in his arms, but he loved that Rosalind—all Rosalinds—as he had never in the world loved anyone else. Intangibly fleeting, unrememberable hours.	Hours that were fleeting and unmemorable.

meeting by accident downtown took lunch together, and Amory heard a story that delighted him.	One day Amory and Howard Gillespie meeting by accident downtown took lunch together, and Amory heard a story that delighted him. Gillespie after several cocktails was in a talkative mood; he began by telling Amory that he was sure Rosalind was slightly eccentric.	They met downtown by chance and had lunch together, and Amory heard a story that he loved.

began by telling Amory that he was sure Rosalind was slightly eccentric.	One day Amory and Howard Gillespie meeting by accident downtown took lunch together, and Amory heard a story that delighted him. Gillespie after several cocktails was in a talkative mood; he began by telling Amory that he was sure Rosalind was slightly eccentric. He had gone with her on a swimming party up in Westchester County, and someone mentioned that Annette Kellerman had been there one day on a visit and had dived from the top of a rickety, thirty-foot summer house.	He started by telling Amory that he was sure Rosalind was a little bit odd.

a talkative mood	One day Amory and Howard Gillespie meeting by accident downtown took lunch together, and Amory heard a story that delighted him. Gillespie after several cocktails was in a talkative mood; he began by telling Amory that he was sure Rosalind was slightly eccentric. He had gone with her on a swimming party up in Westchester County, and someone mentioned that Annette Kellerman had been there one day on a visit and had dived from the top of a rickety, thirty-foot summer house.	He felt like talking.

up in Westchester County, and someone mentioned that Annette Kellerman had been there one day on a visit and had dived from the top of a rickety, thirty-foot summer house.	Gillespie after several cocktails was in a talkative mood; he began by telling Amory that he was sure Rosalind was slightly eccentric. He had gone with her on a swimming party up in Westchester County, and someone mentioned that Annette Kellerman had been there one day on a visit and had dived from the top of a rickety, thirty-foot summer house. Immediately Rosalind insisted that Howard should climb up with her to see what it looked like.	in Westchester County, and someone said that Annette Kellerman had visited there once and dove from the top of a shaky, thirty-foot summer house.

a rickety, thirty-foot summer house	Gillespie after several cocktails was in a talkative mood; he began by telling Amory that he was sure Rosalind was slightly eccentric. He had gone with her on a swimming party up in Westchester County, and someone mentioned that Annette Kellerman had been there one day on a visit and had dived from the top of a rickety, thirty-foot summer house. Immediately Rosalind insisted that Howard should climb up with her to see what it looked like.	a shaky, thirty-foot summer house

climb up with her to see what it looked like.	He had gone with her on a swimming party up in Westchester County, and someone mentioned that Annette Kellerman had been there one day on a visit and had dived from the top of a rickety, thirty-foot summer house. Immediately Rosalind insisted that Howard should climb up with her to see what it looked like. A minute later, as he sat and dangled his feet on the edge, a form shot by him; Rosalind, her arms spread in a beautiful swan dive, had sailed through the air into the clear water.	climb up with her to see what it was like.

spread in a beautiful swan dive, had sailed through the air into the clear water.	Immediately Rosalind insisted that Howard should climb up with her to see what it looked like. A minute later, as he sat and dangled his feet on the edge, a form shot by him; Rosalind, her arms spread in a beautiful swan dive, had sailed through the air into the clear water. “Of course I had to go, after that—and I nearly killed myself.	spread out in a graceful swan dive, she had flown through the air into the clear water.

a beautiful swan dive	Immediately Rosalind insisted that Howard should climb up with her to see what it looked like. A minute later, as he sat and dangled his feet on the edge, a form shot by him; Rosalind, her arms spread in a beautiful swan dive, had sailed through the air into the clear water. “Of course I had to go, after that—and I nearly killed myself.	a graceful dive

nerve to ask me why I stooped over when I dove.	Nobody else in the party tried it. Well, afterward Rosalind had the nerve to ask me why I stooped over when I dove. ‘It didn’t make it any easier,’ she said, ‘it just took all the courage out of it.’	nerve to ask me why I bent over when I dove.

smiling delightedly all through lunch.	Unnecessary, I call it.” Gillespie failed to understand why Amory was smiling delightedly all through lunch. He thought perhaps he was one of these hollow optimists.	Smiling happily during the entire lunch.

these hollow optimists	Gillespie failed to understand why Amory was smiling delightedly all through lunch. He thought perhaps he was one of these hollow optimists.	These fake optimists

one of these hollow optimists.	Gillespie failed to understand why Amory was smiling delightedly all through lunch. He thought perhaps he was one of these hollow optimists.	One of those fake optimists.

Maxfield Parrish’s jovial, colorful Old King Cole	The Knickerbocker Bar, beamed upon by Maxfield Parrish’s jovial, colorful Old King Cole, was well crowded. Amory stopped in the entrance and looked at his wristwatch; he wanted particularly to know the time, for something in his mind that catalogued and classified liked to chip things off cleanly.	Maxfield Parrish's cheerful, colorful Old King Cole

 The Knickerbocker Bar	The Knickerbocker Bar, beamed upon by Maxfield Parrish’s jovial, colorful Old King Cole, was well crowded. Amory stopped in the entrance and looked at his wristwatch; he wanted particularly to know the time, for something in his mind that catalogued and classified liked to chip things off cleanly.	The Knickerbocker Bar

beamed upon by Maxfield Parrish’s jovial, colorful Old King Cole, was well crowded.	The Knickerbocker Bar, beamed upon by Maxfield Parrish’s jovial, colorful Old King Cole, was well crowded. Amory stopped in the entrance and looked at his wristwatch; he wanted particularly to know the time, for something in his mind that catalogued and classified liked to chip things off cleanly.	It was brightly lit by Maxfield Parrish's cheerful, colorful painting of Old King Cole and very crowded.

wanted particularly to know the time, for something in his mind that catalogued and classified liked to chip things off cleanly.	The Knickerbocker Bar, beamed upon by Maxfield Parrish’s jovial, colorful Old King Cole, was well crowded. Amory stopped in the entrance and looked at his wristwatch; he wanted particularly to know the time, for something in his mind that catalogued and classified liked to chip things off cleanly. Later it would satisfy him in a vague way to be able to think “that thing ended at exactly twenty minutes after eight on Thursday, June 10, 1919.”	He especially wanted to know the time because a part of his mind that liked to organize and categorize things wanted to have a precise ending time.

a vague way	Amory stopped in the entrance and looked at his wristwatch; he wanted particularly to know the time, for something in his mind that catalogued and classified liked to chip things off cleanly. Later it would satisfy him in a vague way to be able to think “that thing ended at exactly twenty minutes after eight on Thursday, June 10, 1919.” This was allowing for the walk from her house—a walk concerning which he had afterward not the faintest recollection.	in a vague way

satisfy him in a vague way to be able to think “that thing ended at exactly twenty minutes after eight on Thursday, June 10, 1919.”	Amory stopped in the entrance and looked at his wristwatch; he wanted particularly to know the time, for something in his mind that catalogued and classified liked to chip things off cleanly. Later it would satisfy him in a vague way to be able to think “that thing ended at exactly twenty minutes after eight on Thursday, June 10, 1919.” This was allowing for the walk from her house—a walk concerning which he had afterward not the faintest recollection.	It would vaguely satisfy him to think, "That thing ended precisely at 8:20 PM on Thursday, June 10, 1919."

had afterward not the faintest recollection.	Later it would satisfy him in a vague way to be able to think “that thing ended at exactly twenty minutes after eight on Thursday, June 10, 1919.” This was allowing for the walk from her house—a walk concerning which he had afterward not the faintest recollection. He was in rather grotesque condition: two days of worry and nervousness, of sleepless nights, of untouched meals, culminating in the emotional crisis and Rosalind’s abrupt decision—the strain of it had drugged the foreground of his mind into a merciful coma.	didn't remember at all later.

not the faintest recollection	Later it would satisfy him in a vague way to be able to think “that thing ended at exactly twenty minutes after eight on Thursday, June 10, 1919.” This was allowing for the walk from her house—a walk concerning which he had afterward not the faintest recollection. He was in rather grotesque condition: two days of worry and nervousness, of sleepless nights, of untouched meals, culminating in the emotional crisis and Rosalind’s abrupt decision—the strain of it had drugged the foreground of his mind into a merciful coma.	didn't remember at all

a merciful coma	This was allowing for the walk from her house—a walk concerning which he had afterward not the faintest recollection. He was in rather grotesque condition: two days of worry and nervousness, of sleepless nights, of untouched meals, culminating in the emotional crisis and Rosalind’s abrupt decision—the strain of it had drugged the foreground of his mind into a merciful coma. As he fumbled clumsily with the olives at the free-lunch table, a man approached and spoke to him, and the olives dropped from his nervous hands.	a helpful daze

was in rather grotesque condition: two days of worry and nervousness, of sleepless nights, of untouched meals, culminating in the emotional crisis and Rosalind’s abrupt decision—the strain of it had drugged the foreground of his mind into a merciful coma.	This was allowing for the walk from her house—a walk concerning which he had afterward not the faintest recollection. He was in rather grotesque condition: two days of worry and nervousness, of sleepless nights, of untouched meals, culminating in the emotional crisis and Rosalind’s abrupt decision—the strain of it had drugged the foreground of his mind into a merciful coma. As he fumbled clumsily with the olives at the free-lunch table, a man approached and spoke to him, and the olives dropped from his nervous hands.	He was in a pretty bad state: two days of worry, nervousness, sleepless nights, and not eating, all leading up to the emotional breakdown and Rosalind's sudden decision—the stress of it had numbed his mind.

untouched meals	This was allowing for the walk from her house—a walk concerning which he had afterward not the faintest recollection. He was in rather grotesque condition: two days of worry and nervousness, of sleepless nights, of untouched meals, culminating in the emotional crisis and Rosalind’s abrupt decision—the strain of it had drugged the foreground of his mind into a merciful coma. As he fumbled clumsily with the olives at the free-lunch table, a man approached and spoke to him, and the olives dropped from his nervous hands.	uneaten meals

sleepless nights	This was allowing for the walk from her house—a walk concerning which he had afterward not the faintest recollection. He was in rather grotesque condition: two days of worry and nervousness, of sleepless nights, of untouched meals, culminating in the emotional crisis and Rosalind’s abrupt decision—the strain of it had drugged the foreground of his mind into a merciful coma. As he fumbled clumsily with the olives at the free-lunch table, a man approached and spoke to him, and the olives dropped from his nervous hands.	Nights without sleep

rather grotesque condition	This was allowing for the walk from her house—a walk concerning which he had afterward not the faintest recollection. He was in rather grotesque condition: two days of worry and nervousness, of sleepless nights, of untouched meals, culminating in the emotional crisis and Rosalind’s abrupt decision—the strain of it had drugged the foreground of his mind into a merciful coma. As he fumbled clumsily with the olives at the free-lunch table, a man approached and spoke to him, and the olives dropped from his nervous hands.	He was in a somewhat bizarre state

approached and spoke to him, and the olives dropped from his nervous hands.	He was in rather grotesque condition: two days of worry and nervousness, of sleepless nights, of untouched meals, culminating in the emotional crisis and Rosalind’s abrupt decision—the strain of it had drugged the foreground of his mind into a merciful coma. As he fumbled clumsily with the olives at the free-lunch table, a man approached and spoke to him, and the olives dropped from his nervous hands. “Well, Amory.”	approached and spoke to him, and the olives fell from his nervous hands.

“Well, Amory	As he fumbled clumsily with the olives at the free-lunch table, a man approached and spoke to him, and the olives dropped from his nervous hands. “Well, Amory.” It was someone he had known at Princeton; he had no idea of the name.	"Hello, Amory."

known at Princeton; he had no idea of the name.	“Well, Amory.” It was someone he had known at Princeton; he had no idea of the name. “Hello, old boy—” he heard himself saying.	He knew the person from Princeton, but he couldn't remember their name.

Name’s Jim Wilson	“Hello, old boy—” he heard himself saying. “Name’s Jim Wilson—you’ve forgotten.” “Sure, you bet, Jim.	My name is Jim Wilson.

nodded, his eyes staring oddly.	“Get overseas?” Amory nodded, his eyes staring oddly. Stepping back to let someone pass, he knocked the dish of olives to a crash on the floor.	He nodded, staring strangely.

slapped him on the back.	“Have a drink?” Wilson, ponderously diplomatic, reached over and slapped him on the back. “You’ve had plenty, old boy.”	clapped him on the back.

eyed him dumbly until Wilson grew embarrassed under the scrutiny.	“You’ve had plenty, old boy.” Amory eyed him dumbly until Wilson grew embarrassed under the scrutiny. “Plenty, hell!” said Amory finally.	He stared at him blankly until Wilson felt uncomfortable because Amory was looking at him so closely.

ten o’clock	They decided to sit down. At ten o’clock Wilson was displaced by Carling, class of ’15. Amory, his head spinning gorgeously, layer upon layer of soft satisfaction setting over the bruised spots of his spirit, was discoursing volubly on the war.	At ten o'clock

displaced by Carling, class of ’15.	They decided to sit down. At ten o’clock Wilson was displaced by Carling, class of ’15. Amory, his head spinning gorgeously, layer upon layer of soft satisfaction setting over the bruised spots of his spirit, was discoursing volubly on the war.	Carling, who graduated in 1915, took his place.

layer upon layer of soft satisfaction setting over the bruised spots of his spirit, was discoursing volubly on the war.	At ten o’clock Wilson was displaced by Carling, class of ’15. Amory, his head spinning gorgeously, layer upon layer of soft satisfaction setting over the bruised spots of his spirit, was discoursing volubly on the war. “ ’S a mental was’e,” he insisted with owl-like wisdom.	He was talking a lot about the war, feeling very happy, and his previous hurts were starting to heal.

the bruised spots	At ten o’clock Wilson was displaced by Carling, class of ’15. Amory, his head spinning gorgeously, layer upon layer of soft satisfaction setting over the bruised spots of his spirit, was discoursing volubly on the war. “ ’S a mental was’e,” he insisted with owl-like wisdom.	The hurt parts

insisted with owl-like wisdom.	Amory, his head spinning gorgeously, layer upon layer of soft satisfaction setting over the bruised spots of his spirit, was discoursing volubly on the war. “ ’S a mental was’e,” he insisted with owl-like wisdom. “Two years my life spent inalleshual vacuity.	insisted with wisdom like an owl.

owl-like wisdom	Amory, his head spinning gorgeously, layer upon layer of soft satisfaction setting over the bruised spots of his spirit, was discoursing volubly on the war. “ ’S a mental was’e,” he insisted with owl-like wisdom. “Two years my life spent inalleshual vacuity.	Wise as an owl

inalleshual vacuity	“ ’S a mental was’e,” he insisted with owl-like wisdom. “Two years my life spent inalleshual vacuity. Los’ idealism, got be physcal anmal,” he shook his fist expressively at Old King Cole, “got be Prussian ’bout ev’thing, women ’specially.	intellectual emptiness

physcal anmal	“Two years my life spent inalleshual vacuity. Los’ idealism, got be physcal anmal,” he shook his fist expressively at Old King Cole, “got be Prussian ’bout ev’thing, women ’specially. Use’ be straight ’bout women college.	Physical animal.

shook his fist expressively at Old King Cole, “got be Prussian ’bout ev’thing, women ’specially.	“Two years my life spent inalleshual vacuity. Los’ idealism, got be physcal anmal,” he shook his fist expressively at Old King Cole, “got be Prussian ’bout ev’thing, women ’specially. Use’ be straight ’bout women college.	He shook his fist at Old King Cole, “I had to be strict about everything, especially women.”

Los’ idealism	“Two years my life spent inalleshual vacuity. Los’ idealism, got be physcal anmal,” he shook his fist expressively at Old King Cole, “got be Prussian ’bout ev’thing, women ’specially. Use’ be straight ’bout women college.	Lost idealism

straight ’bout women college.	Los’ idealism, got be physcal anmal,” he shook his fist expressively at Old King Cole, “got be Prussian ’bout ev’thing, women ’specially. Use’ be straight ’bout women college. Now don’givadam.”	He used to be straightforward about women in college.

Now don’givadam	Use’ be straight ’bout women college. Now don’givadam.” He expressed his lack of principle by sweeping a seltzer bottle with a broad gesture to noisy extinction on the floor, but this did not interrupt his speech.	Now don't give a damn.

sweeping a seltzer bottle with a broad gesture to noisy extinction on the floor, but this did not interrupt his speech.	Now don’givadam.” He expressed his lack of principle by sweeping a seltzer bottle with a broad gesture to noisy extinction on the floor, but this did not interrupt his speech. “Seek pleasure where find it for tomorrow die. ’	He smashed a seltzer bottle on the floor with a grand gesture, but he kept talking.

a seltzer bottle	Now don’givadam.” He expressed his lack of principle by sweeping a seltzer bottle with a broad gesture to noisy extinction on the floor, but this did not interrupt his speech. “Seek pleasure where find it for tomorrow die. ’	a seltzer bottle

a broad gesture	Now don’givadam.” He expressed his lack of principle by sweeping a seltzer bottle with a broad gesture to noisy extinction on the floor, but this did not interrupt his speech. “Seek pleasure where find it for tomorrow die. ’	A wide movement.

noisy extinction	Now don’givadam.” He expressed his lack of principle by sweeping a seltzer bottle with a broad gesture to noisy extinction on the floor, but this did not interrupt his speech. “Seek pleasure where find it for tomorrow die. ’	Shattering noisily

find it for tomorrow die. ’	He expressed his lack of principle by sweeping a seltzer bottle with a broad gesture to noisy extinction on the floor, but this did not interrupt his speech. “Seek pleasure where find it for tomorrow die. ’ At’s philos’phy for me now on.”	Find pleasure where you can, because you could die tomorrow.

philos’phy for me now on.”	“Seek pleasure where find it for tomorrow die. ’ At’s philos’phy for me now on.” Carling yawned, but Amory, waxing brilliant, continued: “Use’ wonder ’bout things—people satisfied compromise, fif’y-fif’y att’tude on life.	Philosophy for me from now on.

att’tude on life.	At’s philos’phy for me now on.” Carling yawned, but Amory, waxing brilliant, continued: “Use’ wonder ’bout things—people satisfied compromise, fif’y-fif’y att’tude on life. Now don’ wonder, don’ wonder—” He became so emphatic in impressing on Carling the fact that he didn’t wonder that he lost the thread of his discourse and concluded by announcing to the bar at large that he was a “physcal anmal.”	attitude about life

fif’y-fif’y att’tude	At’s philos’phy for me now on.” Carling yawned, but Amory, waxing brilliant, continued: “Use’ wonder ’bout things—people satisfied compromise, fif’y-fif’y att’tude on life. Now don’ wonder, don’ wonder—” He became so emphatic in impressing on Carling the fact that he didn’t wonder that he lost the thread of his discourse and concluded by announcing to the bar at large that he was a “physcal anmal.”	A halfway attitude

Now don’ wonder, don’ wonder	Carling yawned, but Amory, waxing brilliant, continued: “Use’ wonder ’bout things—people satisfied compromise, fif’y-fif’y att’tude on life. Now don’ wonder, don’ wonder—” He became so emphatic in impressing on Carling the fact that he didn’t wonder that he lost the thread of his discourse and concluded by announcing to the bar at large that he was a “physcal anmal.” “What are you celebrating, Amory?”	Now don't wonder, don't wonder.

emphatic in impressing on Carling the fact that he didn’t wonder that he lost the thread of his discourse and concluded by announcing to the bar at large that he was a “physcal anmal.”	Carling yawned, but Amory, waxing brilliant, continued: “Use’ wonder ’bout things—people satisfied compromise, fif’y-fif’y att’tude on life. Now don’ wonder, don’ wonder—” He became so emphatic in impressing on Carling the fact that he didn’t wonder that he lost the thread of his discourse and concluded by announcing to the bar at large that he was a “physcal anmal.” “What are you celebrating, Amory?”	He was so insistent on making Carling understand he didn't wonder anymore that he lost his train of thought and finished by announcing to everyone in the bar that he was a "physical animal."

a “physcal anmal	Carling yawned, but Amory, waxing brilliant, continued: “Use’ wonder ’bout things—people satisfied compromise, fif’y-fif’y att’tude on life. Now don’ wonder, don’ wonder—” He became so emphatic in impressing on Carling the fact that he didn’t wonder that he lost the thread of his discourse and concluded by announcing to the bar at large that he was a “physcal anmal.” “What are you celebrating, Amory?”	a "physical animal"

“Cel’brating blowmylife	Amory leaned forward confidentially. “Cel’brating blowmylife. Great moment blow my life.	"Celebrating blowmylife"

a bromo-seltzer	Great moment blow my life. Can’t tell you ’bout it—” He heard Carling addressing a remark to the bartender: “Give him a bromo-seltzer.” Amory shook his head indignantly.	A bromo-seltzer

remark to the bartender: “Give him a bromo-seltzer.”	Great moment blow my life. Can’t tell you ’bout it—” He heard Carling addressing a remark to the bartender: “Give him a bromo-seltzer.” Amory shook his head indignantly.	Carling said to the bartender: "Give him a bromo-seltzer."

far as the row of bottles behind the bar.	Amory considered the question. He tried to look at himself in the mirror but even by squinting up one eye could only see as far as the row of bottles behind the bar. “Like som’n solid.	as far as the row of bottles behind the bar.

settled his coat with an attempt at nonchalance, but letting go of the bar was too much for him, and he slumped against a chair.	We go get some—some salad.” He settled his coat with an attempt at nonchalance, but letting go of the bar was too much for him, and he slumped against a chair. “We’ll go over to Shanley’s,” suggested Carling, offering an elbow.	He adjusted his coat like he didn't care, but he couldn't let go of the bar, and he fell into a chair.

suggested Carling, offering an elbow.	He settled his coat with an attempt at nonchalance, but letting go of the bar was too much for him, and he slumped against a chair. “We’ll go over to Shanley’s,” suggested Carling, offering an elbow. With this assistance Amory managed to get his legs in motion enough to propel him across Forty-second Street.	Carling offered his arm and suggested they go.

get his legs in motion enough to propel him across Forty-second Street.	“We’ll go over to Shanley’s,” suggested Carling, offering an elbow. With this assistance Amory managed to get his legs in motion enough to propel him across Forty-second Street. Shanley’s was very dim.	walk across Forty-second Street.

desire to crush people under his heel.	Shanley’s was very dim. He was conscious that he was talking in a loud voice, very succinctly and convincingly, he thought, about a desire to crush people under his heel. He consumed three club sandwiches, devouring each as though it were no larger than a chocolate-drop.	He wanted to stomp on people.

devouring each as though it were no larger than a chocolate-drop.	He was conscious that he was talking in a loud voice, very succinctly and convincingly, he thought, about a desire to crush people under his heel. He consumed three club sandwiches, devouring each as though it were no larger than a chocolate-drop. Then Rosalind began popping into his mind again, and he found his lips forming her name over and over.	eating each one as if it were tiny.

had a hazy, listless sense of people in dress suits, probably waiters, gathering around the table.	Then Rosalind began popping into his mind again, and he found his lips forming her name over and over. Next he was sleepy, and he had a hazy, listless sense of people in dress suits, probably waiters, gathering around the table. He was in a room and Carling was saying something about a knot in his shoelace.	He had a blurry, tired feeling of people in suits, likely waiters, standing around the table.

probably waiters	Then Rosalind began popping into his mind again, and he found his lips forming her name over and over. Next he was sleepy, and he had a hazy, listless sense of people in dress suits, probably waiters, gathering around the table. He was in a room and Carling was saying something about a knot in his shoelace.	Likely waiters

a hazy, listless sense	Then Rosalind began popping into his mind again, and he found his lips forming her name over and over. Next he was sleepy, and he had a hazy, listless sense of people in dress suits, probably waiters, gathering around the table. He was in a room and Carling was saying something about a knot in his shoelace.	a vague, tired feeling

was in a room and Carling was saying something about a knot in his shoelace.	Next he was sleepy, and he had a hazy, listless sense of people in dress suits, probably waiters, gathering around the table. He was in a room and Carling was saying something about a knot in his shoelace. “Nemmine,” he managed to articulate drowsily.	He was in a room and Carling was talking about his shoelace being knotted.

Sleep in ’em.”	“Nemmine,” he managed to articulate drowsily. “Sleep in ’em.”	Sleep in them.

surroundings, evidently a bedroom and bath in a good hotel.	He awoke laughing and his eyes lazily roamed his surroundings, evidently a bedroom and bath in a good hotel. His head was whirring and picture after picture was forming and blurring and melting before his eyes, but beyond the desire to laugh he had no entirely conscious reaction.	the room, which looked like a bedroom and bathroom in a nice hotel

evidently a bedroom	He awoke laughing and his eyes lazily roamed his surroundings, evidently a bedroom and bath in a good hotel. His head was whirring and picture after picture was forming and blurring and melting before his eyes, but beyond the desire to laugh he had no entirely conscious reaction.	It was clearly a bedroom.

blurring and melting before his eyes, but beyond the desire to laugh he had no entirely conscious reaction.	He awoke laughing and his eyes lazily roamed his surroundings, evidently a bedroom and bath in a good hotel. His head was whirring and picture after picture was forming and blurring and melting before his eyes, but beyond the desire to laugh he had no entirely conscious reaction. He reached for the phone beside his bed.	They were blurring and melting in front of him, but he didn't have any conscious reaction other than wanting to laugh.

lay for a moment and wondered idly whether they’d send up a bottle or just two of those little glass containers.	“Knickerbocker? All right, send up two rye highballs—” He lay for a moment and wondered idly whether they’d send up a bottle or just two of those little glass containers. Then, with an effort, he struggled out of bed and ambled into the bathroom.	He lay there for a moment and wondered if they would send up a bottle or just two of those small glass containers.

two rye highballs	“Knickerbocker? All right, send up two rye highballs—” He lay for a moment and wondered idly whether they’d send up a bottle or just two of those little glass containers. Then, with an effort, he struggled out of bed and ambled into the bathroom.	Two rye highballs

out of bed and ambled into the bathroom.	All right, send up two rye highballs—” He lay for a moment and wondered idly whether they’d send up a bottle or just two of those little glass containers. Then, with an effort, he struggled out of bed and ambled into the bathroom. When he emerged, rubbing himself lazily with a towel, he found the bar boy with the drinks and had a sudden desire to kid him.	got out of bed and walked slowly into the bathroom.

found the bar boy with the drinks and had a sudden desire to kid him.	Then, with an effort, he struggled out of bed and ambled into the bathroom. When he emerged, rubbing himself lazily with a towel, he found the bar boy with the drinks and had a sudden desire to kid him. On reflection he decided that this would be undignified, so he waved him away.	saw the bar boy with the drinks and suddenly wanted to joke with him.

decided that this would be undignified, so he waved him away.	When he emerged, rubbing himself lazily with a towel, he found the bar boy with the drinks and had a sudden desire to kid him. On reflection he decided that this would be undignified, so he waved him away. As the new alcohol tumbled into his stomach and warmed him, the isolated pictures began slowly to form a cinema reel of the day before.	decided that it would be embarrassing, so he sent him away.

tumbled into his stomach and warmed him, the isolated pictures began slowly to form a cinema reel of the day before.	On reflection he decided that this would be undignified, so he waved him away. As the new alcohol tumbled into his stomach and warmed him, the isolated pictures began slowly to form a cinema reel of the day before. Again he saw Rosalind curled weeping among the pillows, again he felt her tears against his cheek.	went into his stomach and warmed him, the separate images started slowly to become like a movie of the previous day.

tears against his cheek.	As the new alcohol tumbled into his stomach and warmed him, the isolated pictures began slowly to form a cinema reel of the day before. Again he saw Rosalind curled weeping among the pillows, again he felt her tears against his cheek. Her words began ringing in his ears: “Don’t ever forget me, Amory—don’t ever forget me—” “Hell!”	tears on his cheek.

Amory—don’t ever forget me—” “Hell!”	Again he saw Rosalind curled weeping among the pillows, again he felt her tears against his cheek. Her words began ringing in his ears: “Don’t ever forget me, Amory—don’t ever forget me—” “Hell!” he faltered aloud, and then he choked and collapsed on the bed in a shaken spasm of grief.	Amory—don’t ever forget me—” "Damn!"

a shaken spasm	Her words began ringing in his ears: “Don’t ever forget me, Amory—don’t ever forget me—” “Hell!” he faltered aloud, and then he choked and collapsed on the bed in a shaken spasm of grief. After a minute he opened his eyes and regarded the ceiling.	A trembling fit

collapsed on the bed in a shaken spasm of grief.	Her words began ringing in his ears: “Don’t ever forget me, Amory—don’t ever forget me—” “Hell!” he faltered aloud, and then he choked and collapsed on the bed in a shaken spasm of grief. After a minute he opened his eyes and regarded the ceiling.	collapsed on the bed, shaking with grief.

“Damned fool	After a minute he opened his eyes and regarded the ceiling. “Damned fool!” he exclaimed in disgust, and with a voluminous sigh rose and approached the bottle.	"Damn fool!"

a voluminous sigh	“Damned fool!” he exclaimed in disgust, and with a voluminous sigh rose and approached the bottle. After another glass he gave way loosely to the luxury of tears.	a big sigh

phrased to himself emotions that would make him react even more strongly to sorrow.	After another glass he gave way loosely to the luxury of tears. Purposely he called up into his mind little incidents of the vanished spring, phrased to himself emotions that would make him react even more strongly to sorrow. “We were so happy,” he intoned dramatically, “so very happy.”	He described emotions to himself that would make him feel even sadder.

the vanished spring	After another glass he gave way loosely to the luxury of tears. Purposely he called up into his mind little incidents of the vanished spring, phrased to himself emotions that would make him react even more strongly to sorrow. “We were so happy,” he intoned dramatically, “so very happy.”	the spring that's gone

buried in the pillow.	“We were so happy,” he intoned dramatically, “so very happy.” Then he gave way again and knelt beside the bed, his head half-buried in the pillow. “My own girl—my own—Oh—” He clinched his teeth so that the tears streamed in a flood from his eyes.	He buried his head in the pillow.

lay exhausted while he realized slowly that he had been very drunk the night before, and that his head was spinning again wildly.	It’s got to be that way—it’s got to be—” And then again: “We’ve been so happy, so very happy.” He rose to his feet and threw himself on the bed in an ecstasy of sentiment, and then lay exhausted while he realized slowly that he had been very drunk the night before, and that his head was spinning again wildly. He laughed, rose, and crossed again to Lethe.	He lay there tired and realized slowly that he had been very drunk the night before, and that his head was spinning wildly again.

crossed again to Lethe.	He rose to his feet and threw himself on the bed in an ecstasy of sentiment, and then lay exhausted while he realized slowly that he had been very drunk the night before, and that his head was spinning again wildly. He laughed, rose, and crossed again to Lethe. At noon he ran into a crowd in the Biltmore bar, and the riot began again.	Went back to the bar.

the Biltmore bar	He laughed, rose, and crossed again to Lethe. At noon he ran into a crowd in the Biltmore bar, and the riot began again. He had a vague recollection afterward of discussing French poetry with a British officer who was introduced to him as “Captain Corn, of his Majesty’s Foot,” and he remembered attempting to recite Clair de Lune at luncheon; then he slept in a big, soft chair until almost five o’clock when another crowd found and woke him; there followed an alcoholic dressing of several temperaments for the ordeal of dinner.	The bar at the Biltmore Hotel

crowd in the Biltmore bar, and the riot began again.	He laughed, rose, and crossed again to Lethe. At noon he ran into a crowd in the Biltmore bar, and the riot began again. He had a vague recollection afterward of discussing French poetry with a British officer who was introduced to him as “Captain Corn, of his Majesty’s Foot,” and he remembered attempting to recite Clair de Lune at luncheon; then he slept in a big, soft chair until almost five o’clock when another crowd found and woke him; there followed an alcoholic dressing of several temperaments for the ordeal of dinner.	A crowd was in the Biltmore bar, and the chaos started again.

several temperaments	At noon he ran into a crowd in the Biltmore bar, and the riot began again. He had a vague recollection afterward of discussing French poetry with a British officer who was introduced to him as “Captain Corn, of his Majesty’s Foot,” and he remembered attempting to recite Clair de Lune at luncheon; then he slept in a big, soft chair until almost five o’clock when another crowd found and woke him; there followed an alcoholic dressing of several temperaments for the ordeal of dinner. They selected theatre tickets at Tyson’s for a play that had a four-drink programme—a play with two monotonous voices, with turbid, gloomy scenes, and lighting effects that were hard to follow when his eyes behaved so amazingly.	Several different personalities (were getting drunk)

his Majesty’s Foot	At noon he ran into a crowd in the Biltmore bar, and the riot began again. He had a vague recollection afterward of discussing French poetry with a British officer who was introduced to him as “Captain Corn, of his Majesty’s Foot,” and he remembered attempting to recite Clair de Lune at luncheon; then he slept in a big, soft chair until almost five o’clock when another crowd found and woke him; there followed an alcoholic dressing of several temperaments for the ordeal of dinner. They selected theatre tickets at Tyson’s for a play that had a four-drink programme—a play with two monotonous voices, with turbid, gloomy scenes, and lighting effects that were hard to follow when his eyes behaved so amazingly.	The British army.

an alcoholic dressing	At noon he ran into a crowd in the Biltmore bar, and the riot began again. He had a vague recollection afterward of discussing French poetry with a British officer who was introduced to him as “Captain Corn, of his Majesty’s Foot,” and he remembered attempting to recite Clair de Lune at luncheon; then he slept in a big, soft chair until almost five o’clock when another crowd found and woke him; there followed an alcoholic dressing of several temperaments for the ordeal of dinner. They selected theatre tickets at Tyson’s for a play that had a four-drink programme—a play with two monotonous voices, with turbid, gloomy scenes, and lighting effects that were hard to follow when his eyes behaved so amazingly.	drinking to get ready

almost five o’clock	At noon he ran into a crowd in the Biltmore bar, and the riot began again. He had a vague recollection afterward of discussing French poetry with a British officer who was introduced to him as “Captain Corn, of his Majesty’s Foot,” and he remembered attempting to recite Clair de Lune at luncheon; then he slept in a big, soft chair until almost five o’clock when another crowd found and woke him; there followed an alcoholic dressing of several temperaments for the ordeal of dinner. They selected theatre tickets at Tyson’s for a play that had a four-drink programme—a play with two monotonous voices, with turbid, gloomy scenes, and lighting effects that were hard to follow when his eyes behaved so amazingly.	Nearly five o'clock

slept in a big, soft chair until almost five o’clock when another crowd found and woke him; there followed an alcoholic dressing of several temperaments for the ordeal of dinner.	At noon he ran into a crowd in the Biltmore bar, and the riot began again. He had a vague recollection afterward of discussing French poetry with a British officer who was introduced to him as “Captain Corn, of his Majesty’s Foot,” and he remembered attempting to recite Clair de Lune at luncheon; then he slept in a big, soft chair until almost five o’clock when another crowd found and woke him; there followed an alcoholic dressing of several temperaments for the ordeal of dinner. They selected theatre tickets at Tyson’s for a play that had a four-drink programme—a play with two monotonous voices, with turbid, gloomy scenes, and lighting effects that were hard to follow when his eyes behaved so amazingly.	He slept in a big, soft chair until almost five o’clock, when another crowd found him and woke him. Then they all got drunk to prepare themselves for dinner.

Clair de Lune	At noon he ran into a crowd in the Biltmore bar, and the riot began again. He had a vague recollection afterward of discussing French poetry with a British officer who was introduced to him as “Captain Corn, of his Majesty’s Foot,” and he remembered attempting to recite Clair de Lune at luncheon; then he slept in a big, soft chair until almost five o’clock when another crowd found and woke him; there followed an alcoholic dressing of several temperaments for the ordeal of dinner. They selected theatre tickets at Tyson’s for a play that had a four-drink programme—a play with two monotonous voices, with turbid, gloomy scenes, and lighting effects that were hard to follow when his eyes behaved so amazingly.	"Clair de Lune"

a vague recollection	At noon he ran into a crowd in the Biltmore bar, and the riot began again. He had a vague recollection afterward of discussing French poetry with a British officer who was introduced to him as “Captain Corn, of his Majesty’s Foot,” and he remembered attempting to recite Clair de Lune at luncheon; then he slept in a big, soft chair until almost five o’clock when another crowd found and woke him; there followed an alcoholic dressing of several temperaments for the ordeal of dinner. They selected theatre tickets at Tyson’s for a play that had a four-drink programme—a play with two monotonous voices, with turbid, gloomy scenes, and lighting effects that were hard to follow when his eyes behaved so amazingly.	A fuzzy memory

two monotonous voices	He had a vague recollection afterward of discussing French poetry with a British officer who was introduced to him as “Captain Corn, of his Majesty’s Foot,” and he remembered attempting to recite Clair de Lune at luncheon; then he slept in a big, soft chair until almost five o’clock when another crowd found and woke him; there followed an alcoholic dressing of several temperaments for the ordeal of dinner. They selected theatre tickets at Tyson’s for a play that had a four-drink programme—a play with two monotonous voices, with turbid, gloomy scenes, and lighting effects that were hard to follow when his eyes behaved so amazingly. He imagined afterward that it must have been The Jest.	Two boring voices.

play that had a four-drink programme—a play with two monotonous voices, with turbid, gloomy scenes, and lighting effects that were hard to follow when his eyes behaved so amazingly.	He had a vague recollection afterward of discussing French poetry with a British officer who was introduced to him as “Captain Corn, of his Majesty’s Foot,” and he remembered attempting to recite Clair de Lune at luncheon; then he slept in a big, soft chair until almost five o’clock when another crowd found and woke him; there followed an alcoholic dressing of several temperaments for the ordeal of dinner. They selected theatre tickets at Tyson’s for a play that had a four-drink programme—a play with two monotonous voices, with turbid, gloomy scenes, and lighting effects that were hard to follow when his eyes behaved so amazingly. He imagined afterward that it must have been The Jest.	A play that was meant to be enjoyed with four drinks, with two boring voices, dark and depressing scenes, and lighting that was difficult to understand because his eyes were acting strangely.

turbid, gloomy scenes	He had a vague recollection afterward of discussing French poetry with a British officer who was introduced to him as “Captain Corn, of his Majesty’s Foot,” and he remembered attempting to recite Clair de Lune at luncheon; then he slept in a big, soft chair until almost five o’clock when another crowd found and woke him; there followed an alcoholic dressing of several temperaments for the ordeal of dinner. They selected theatre tickets at Tyson’s for a play that had a four-drink programme—a play with two monotonous voices, with turbid, gloomy scenes, and lighting effects that were hard to follow when his eyes behaved so amazingly. He imagined afterward that it must have been The Jest.	Dark and depressing scenes

Then the Coconut Grove	He imagined afterward that it must have been The Jest. Then the Coconut Grove, where Amory slept again on a little balcony outside. Out in Shanley’s, Yonkers, he became almost logical, and by a careful control of the number of highballs he drank, grew quite lucid and garrulous.	Next was the Coconut Grove.

slept again on a little balcony outside.	He imagined afterward that it must have been The Jest. Then the Coconut Grove, where Amory slept again on a little balcony outside. Out in Shanley’s, Yonkers, he became almost logical, and by a careful control of the number of highballs he drank, grew quite lucid and garrulous.	slept again on a small balcony outside.

a little balcony	He imagined afterward that it must have been The Jest. Then the Coconut Grove, where Amory slept again on a little balcony outside. Out in Shanley’s, Yonkers, he became almost logical, and by a careful control of the number of highballs he drank, grew quite lucid and garrulous.	a small balcony

grew quite lucid and garrulous.	Then the Coconut Grove, where Amory slept again on a little balcony outside. Out in Shanley’s, Yonkers, he became almost logical, and by a careful control of the number of highballs he drank, grew quite lucid and garrulous. He found that the party consisted of five men, two of whom he knew slightly; he became righteous about paying his share of the expense and insisted in a loud voice on arranging everything then and there to the amusement of the tables around him.	became quite clear-headed and talkative.

share of the expense and insisted in a loud voice on arranging everything then and there to the amusement of the tables around him.	Out in Shanley’s, Yonkers, he became almost logical, and by a careful control of the number of highballs he drank, grew quite lucid and garrulous. He found that the party consisted of five men, two of whom he knew slightly; he became righteous about paying his share of the expense and insisted in a loud voice on arranging everything then and there to the amusement of the tables around him. Someone mentioned that a famous cabaret star was at the next table, so Amory rose and, approaching gallantly, introduced himself.	He insisted on paying his part of the bill and loudly demanded to organize everything right away, which entertained the other tables.

was at the next table, so Amory rose and, approaching gallantly, introduced himself.	He found that the party consisted of five men, two of whom he knew slightly; he became righteous about paying his share of the expense and insisted in a loud voice on arranging everything then and there to the amusement of the tables around him. Someone mentioned that a famous cabaret star was at the next table, so Amory rose and, approaching gallantly, introduced himself. this involved him in an argument, first with her escort and then with the headwaiter—Amory’s attitude being a lofty and exaggerated courtesy.	was at the next table, so Amory stood up, walked over, and introduced himself in a charming way.

a famous cabaret star	He found that the party consisted of five men, two of whom he knew slightly; he became righteous about paying his share of the expense and insisted in a loud voice on arranging everything then and there to the amusement of the tables around him. Someone mentioned that a famous cabaret star was at the next table, so Amory rose and, approaching gallantly, introduced himself. this involved him in an argument, first with her escort and then with the headwaiter—Amory’s attitude being a lofty and exaggerated courtesy.	a well-known cabaret singer

involved him in an argument, first with her escort and then with the headwaiter—Amory’s attitude being a lofty and exaggerated courtesy.	Someone mentioned that a famous cabaret star was at the next table, so Amory rose and, approaching gallantly, introduced himself. this involved him in an argument, first with her escort and then with the headwaiter—Amory’s attitude being a lofty and exaggerated courtesy. he consented, after being confronted with irrefutable logic, to being led back to his own table.	He got into an argument, first with her escort and then with the headwaiter, because Amory was acting very politely but in an over-the-top way.

a lofty and exaggerated courtesy	Someone mentioned that a famous cabaret star was at the next table, so Amory rose and, approaching gallantly, introduced himself. this involved him in an argument, first with her escort and then with the headwaiter—Amory’s attitude being a lofty and exaggerated courtesy. he consented, after being confronted with irrefutable logic, to being led back to his own table.	Very polite and over the top.

Amory’s attitude	Someone mentioned that a famous cabaret star was at the next table, so Amory rose and, approaching gallantly, introduced himself. this involved him in an argument, first with her escort and then with the headwaiter—Amory’s attitude being a lofty and exaggerated courtesy. he consented, after being confronted with irrefutable logic, to being led back to his own table.	Amory's behavior

back to his own table.	this involved him in an argument, first with her escort and then with the headwaiter—Amory’s attitude being a lofty and exaggerated courtesy. he consented, after being confronted with irrefutable logic, to being led back to his own table. “Decided to commit suicide,” he announced suddenly.	back to his table.

irrefutable logic	this involved him in an argument, first with her escort and then with the headwaiter—Amory’s attitude being a lofty and exaggerated courtesy. he consented, after being confronted with irrefutable logic, to being led back to his own table. “Decided to commit suicide,” he announced suddenly.	Undeniable reasoning

take a room at the Commodore, get into a hot bath and open a vein.”	Tomorrow morning. Going to take a room at the Commodore, get into a hot bath and open a vein.” “He’s getting morbid!”	Get a room at the Commodore, take a hot bath, and kill myself.”

rye, old boy!”	“He’s getting morbid!” “You need another rye, old boy!” “We’ll all talk it over tomorrow.”	Rye, my friend!

dissuaded, from argument at least.	“We’ll all talk it over tomorrow.” But Amory was not to be dissuaded, from argument at least. “Did you ever get that way?”	discouraged from arguing, at least.

This provoked discussion	“My chronic state.” This provoked discussion. One man said that he got so depressed sometimes that he seriously considered it.	This started a conversation.

one’s health	Another agreed that there was nothing to live for. “Captain Corn,” who had somehow rejoined the party, said that in his opinion it was when one’s health was bad that one felt that way most. Amory’s suggestion was that they should each order a Bronx, mix broken glass in it, and drink it off.	When you are unhealthy

was when one’s health was bad that one felt that way most.	Another agreed that there was nothing to live for. “Captain Corn,” who had somehow rejoined the party, said that in his opinion it was when one’s health was bad that one felt that way most. Amory’s suggestion was that they should each order a Bronx, mix broken glass in it, and drink it off.	You feel that way the most when you're not healthy.

Amory’s suggestion	“Captain Corn,” who had somehow rejoined the party, said that in his opinion it was when one’s health was bad that one felt that way most. Amory’s suggestion was that they should each order a Bronx, mix broken glass in it, and drink it off. To his relief no one applauded the idea, so having finished his highball, he balanced his chin in his hand and his elbow on the table—a most delicate, scarcely noticeable sleeping position, he assured himself—and went into a deep stupor.	Amory's idea

a most delicate, scarcely noticeable sleeping position	Amory’s suggestion was that they should each order a Bronx, mix broken glass in it, and drink it off. To his relief no one applauded the idea, so having finished his highball, he balanced his chin in his hand and his elbow on the table—a most delicate, scarcely noticeable sleeping position, he assured himself—and went into a deep stupor. He was awakened by a woman clinging to him, a pretty woman, with brown, disarranged hair and dark blue eyes.	a very subtle and almost unnoticeable way of sleeping

went into a deep stupor.	Amory’s suggestion was that they should each order a Bronx, mix broken glass in it, and drink it off. To his relief no one applauded the idea, so having finished his highball, he balanced his chin in his hand and his elbow on the table—a most delicate, scarcely noticeable sleeping position, he assured himself—and went into a deep stupor. He was awakened by a woman clinging to him, a pretty woman, with brown, disarranged hair and dark blue eyes.	He fell into a deep sleep.

a deep stupor	Amory’s suggestion was that they should each order a Bronx, mix broken glass in it, and drink it off. To his relief no one applauded the idea, so having finished his highball, he balanced his chin in his hand and his elbow on the table—a most delicate, scarcely noticeable sleeping position, he assured himself—and went into a deep stupor. He was awakened by a woman clinging to him, a pretty woman, with brown, disarranged hair and dark blue eyes.	a deep sleep

woman, with brown, disarranged hair and dark blue eyes.	To his relief no one applauded the idea, so having finished his highball, he balanced his chin in his hand and his elbow on the table—a most delicate, scarcely noticeable sleeping position, he assured himself—and went into a deep stupor. He was awakened by a woman clinging to him, a pretty woman, with brown, disarranged hair and dark blue eyes. “Take me home!”	The woman had brown, messy hair and dark blue eyes.

brown, disarranged hair	To his relief no one applauded the idea, so having finished his highball, he balanced his chin in his hand and his elbow on the table—a most delicate, scarcely noticeable sleeping position, he assured himself—and went into a deep stupor. He was awakened by a woman clinging to him, a pretty woman, with brown, disarranged hair and dark blue eyes. “Take me home!”	Brown, messy hair

said Amory, blinking.	she cried. “Hello!” said Amory, blinking. “I like you,” she announced tenderly.	Amory said, blinking.

man in the background and that one of his party was arguing with him.	“I like you too.” He noticed that there was a noisy man in the background and that one of his party was arguing with him. “Fella I was with’s a damn fool,” confided the blue-eyed woman.	The man in the background and someone he was with were arguing.

a noisy man	“I like you too.” He noticed that there was a noisy man in the background and that one of his party was arguing with him. “Fella I was with’s a damn fool,” confided the blue-eyed woman.	A noisy man.

was with’s a damn fool,” confided the blue-eyed woman.	He noticed that there was a noisy man in the background and that one of his party was arguing with him. “Fella I was with’s a damn fool,” confided the blue-eyed woman. “I hate him.	The person I was with is a damn fool," said the blue-eyed woman.

queried Amory with intense wisdom.	I want to go home with you.” “You drunk?” queried Amory with intense wisdom. She nodded coyly.	Amory asked with a lot of insight.

Go home with him,” he advised gravely.	She nodded coyly. “Go home with him,” he advised gravely. “He brought you.”	Go home with him," he said seriously.

the noisy man	“He brought you.” At this point the noisy man in the background broke away from his detainers and approached. “Say!”	The noisy man.

away from his detainers and approached.	“He brought you.” At this point the noisy man in the background broke away from his detainers and approached. “Say!”	He broke free from those holding him and came closer.

regarded him coldly, while the girl clung to him closer.	“I brought this girl out here and you’re butting in!” Amory regarded him coldly, while the girl clung to him closer. “You let go that girl!”	He looked at him coldly, and the girl held onto him tighter.

the noisy man	“You let go that girl!” cried the noisy man. Amory tried to make his eyes threatening.	The noisy man.

spoke in Amory’s ear.	She did have beautiful eyes. Someone leaned over and spoke in Amory’s ear. “That’s just Margaret Diamond.	whispered to Amory

Amory’s ear	She did have beautiful eyes. Someone leaned over and spoke in Amory’s ear. “That’s just Margaret Diamond.	Amory’s ear

take care of her, then!” shouted Amory furiously.	Better let her go.” “Let him take care of her, then!” shouted Amory furiously. “I’m no W.Y.C.A. worker, am I?—am I?”	Then let him take care of her!" shouted Amory angrily.

no W.Y.C.A. worker	“Let him take care of her, then!” shouted Amory furiously. “I’m no W.Y.C.A. worker, am I?—am I?” “Let her go!”	I'm not a social worker

I?—am I	“Let him take care of her, then!” shouted Amory furiously. “I’m no W.Y.C.A. worker, am I?—am I?” “Let her go!”	Am I?

crowd around the table thickened.	Let her hang!” The crowd around the table thickened. For an instant a brawl threatened, but a sleek waiter bent back Margaret Diamond’s fingers until she released her hold on Amory, whereupon she slapped the waiter furiously in the face and flung her arms about her raging original escort.	The crowd got bigger around the table.

instant a brawl threatened, but a sleek waiter bent back Margaret Diamond’s fingers until she released her hold on Amory, whereupon she slapped the waiter furiously in the face and flung her arms about her raging original escort.	The crowd around the table thickened. For an instant a brawl threatened, but a sleek waiter bent back Margaret Diamond’s fingers until she released her hold on Amory, whereupon she slapped the waiter furiously in the face and flung her arms about her raging original escort. “Oh, Lord!” cried Amory.	For a moment, a fight almost broke out. But a smooth waiter bent Margaret Diamond's fingers back until she let go of Amory. Then, she furiously slapped the waiter and threw her arms around her angry date.

a sleek waiter	The crowd around the table thickened. For an instant a brawl threatened, but a sleek waiter bent back Margaret Diamond’s fingers until she released her hold on Amory, whereupon she slapped the waiter furiously in the face and flung her arms about her raging original escort. “Oh, Lord!” cried Amory.	A smooth waiter

Margaret Diamond’s fingers	The crowd around the table thickened. For an instant a brawl threatened, but a sleek waiter bent back Margaret Diamond’s fingers until she released her hold on Amory, whereupon she slapped the waiter furiously in the face and flung her arms about her raging original escort. “Oh, Lord!” cried Amory.	Margaret Diamond's fingers

getting scarce!”	“Let’s go!” “Come on, the taxis are getting scarce!” “Check, waiter.”	getting scarce!

“Check, waiter	“Come on, the taxis are getting scarce!” “Check, waiter.” “C’mon, Amory.	“Check, waiter.”

door at Bascome and Barlow’s advertising agency.	Two mornings later he knocked at the president’s door at Bascome and Barlow’s advertising agency. “Come in!”	The door at the advertising agency Bascome and Barlow.

Barlow’s advertising agency	Two mornings later he knocked at the president’s door at Bascome and Barlow’s advertising agency. “Come in!”	Barlow's advertising agency

the president’s door	Two mornings later he knocked at the president’s door at Bascome and Barlow’s advertising agency. “Come in!”	The president's door

“Morning, Mr. Barlow	Amory entered unsteadily. “Morning, Mr. Barlow.” Mr. Barlow brought his glasses to the inspection and set his mouth slightly ajar that he might better listen.	"Morning, Mr. Barlow"

set his mouth slightly ajar that he might better listen.	“Morning, Mr. Barlow.” Mr. Barlow brought his glasses to the inspection and set his mouth slightly ajar that he might better listen. “Well, Mr. Blaine.	He opened his mouth a little to hear better.

“Well, Mr. Blaine	Mr. Barlow brought his glasses to the inspection and set his mouth slightly ajar that he might better listen. “Well, Mr. Blaine. We haven’t seen you for several days.”	"Well, Mr. Blaine,"

tired of it,” interrupted Amory rudely.	I thought our relations had been quite—ah—pleasant. You seemed to be a hard worker—a little inclined perhaps to write fancy copy—” “I just got tired of it,” interrupted Amory rudely. “It didn’t matter a damn to me whether Harebell’s flour was any better than anyone else’s.	I got tired of it," Amory rudely interrupted.

anyone else’s.	You seemed to be a hard worker—a little inclined perhaps to write fancy copy—” “I just got tired of it,” interrupted Amory rudely. “It didn’t matter a damn to me whether Harebell’s flour was any better than anyone else’s. In fact, I never ate any of it.	anyone else's.

Harebell’s flour	You seemed to be a hard worker—a little inclined perhaps to write fancy copy—” “I just got tired of it,” interrupted Amory rudely. “It didn’t matter a damn to me whether Harebell’s flour was any better than anyone else’s. In fact, I never ate any of it.	Harebell's flour

tired of telling people about it—	In fact, I never ate any of it. So I got tired of telling people about it— oh, I know I’ve been drinking—” Mr. Barlow’s face steeled by several ingots of expression.	I was tired of talking about it.

Mr. Barlow’s face	So I got tired of telling people about it— oh, I know I’ve been drinking—” Mr. Barlow’s face steeled by several ingots of expression. “You asked for a position—” Amory waved him to silence.	Mr. Barlow's face

ingots of expression.	So I got tired of telling people about it— oh, I know I’ve been drinking—” Mr. Barlow’s face steeled by several ingots of expression. “You asked for a position—” Amory waved him to silence.	A very serious look.

several ingots	So I got tired of telling people about it— oh, I know I’ve been drinking—” Mr. Barlow’s face steeled by several ingots of expression. “You asked for a position—” Amory waved him to silence.	A lot

asked for a position—” Amory waved him to silence.	oh, I know I’ve been drinking—” Mr. Barlow’s face steeled by several ingots of expression. “You asked for a position—” Amory waved him to silence. “And I think I was rottenly underpaid.	You asked for a job"—Amory motioned for him to be quiet.

a good carpenter	“And I think I was rottenly underpaid. Thirty-five dollars a week—less than a good carpenter.” “You had just started.	A skilled carpenter

less than a good carpenter.”	“And I think I was rottenly underpaid. Thirty-five dollars a week—less than a good carpenter.” “You had just started.	Less than a good carpenter.

took about ten thousand dollars to educate me where I could write your darned stuff for you.	You’d never worked before,” said Mr. Barlow coolly. “But it took about ten thousand dollars to educate me where I could write your darned stuff for you. Anyway, as far as length of service goes, you’ve got stenographers here you’ve paid fifteen a week for five years.”	It cost around ten thousand dollars to educate me so I could write your annoying stuff for you.

your darned stuff	You’d never worked before,” said Mr. Barlow coolly. “But it took about ten thousand dollars to educate me where I could write your darned stuff for you. Anyway, as far as length of service goes, you’ve got stenographers here you’ve paid fifteen a week for five years.”	your annoying writing

got stenographers here you’ve paid fifteen a week for five years.”	“But it took about ten thousand dollars to educate me where I could write your darned stuff for you. Anyway, as far as length of service goes, you’ve got stenographers here you’ve paid fifteen a week for five years.” “I’m not going to argue with you, sir,” said Mr. Barlow rising.	You have stenographers here who you've paid fifteen dollars a week for five years.

argue with you, sir,” said Mr. Barlow rising.	Anyway, as far as length of service goes, you’ve got stenographers here you’ve paid fifteen a week for five years.” “I’m not going to argue with you, sir,” said Mr. Barlow rising. “Neither am I. I just wanted to tell you I’m quitting.”	Argue with you, sir,” Mr. Barlow said, getting up.

looking at each other impassively and then Amory turned and left the office.	“Neither am I. I just wanted to tell you I’m quitting.” They stood for a moment looking at each other impassively and then Amory turned and left the office.	They looked at each other without showing any emotion, and then Amory turned and left the office.

Lord, Amory, where’d you get the black eye—and the jaw?”	“Well?” “Well?” “Good Lord, Amory, where’d you get the black eye—and the jaw?” Amory laughed.	Wow, Amory, where did you get the black eye and the injured jaw?

a low whistle	“Look here!” Tom emitted a low whistle. “What hit you?”	a low whistle

couple of sailors and a few stray pedestrians, I guess.	“Who was it?” “Well, there were some waiters and a couple of sailors and a few stray pedestrians, I guess. It’s the strangest feeling.	A couple of sailors and a few random people on the street, I think.

a few stray pedestrians	“Who was it?” “Well, there were some waiters and a couple of sailors and a few stray pedestrians, I guess. It’s the strangest feeling.	Some random people walking by

fall down after a while and everybody sort of slashes in at you before you hit the ground—then they kick you.”	You ought to get beaten up just for the experience of it. You fall down after a while and everybody sort of slashes in at you before you hit the ground—then they kick you.” Tom lighted a cigarette.	You fall down eventually, and everyone attacks you before you land—then they kick you.

chasing you all over town, Amory.	Tom lighted a cigarette. “I spent a day chasing you all over town, Amory. But you always kept a little ahead of me.	I was chasing you all over town, Amory.

tumbled into a chair and asked for a cigarette.	I’d say you’ve been on some party.” Amory tumbled into a chair and asked for a cigarette. “You sober now?” asked Tom quizzically.	He collapsed into a chair and asked for a cigarette.

go home and live, so he—” A spasm of pain shook Amory.	“Well, Alec has left. His family had been after him to go home and live, so he—” A spasm of pain shook Amory. “Too bad.”	go home and live, so he—” Amory was suddenly in pain.

get someone else if we’re going to stay here.	“Yes, it is too bad. We’ll have to get someone else if we’re going to stay here. The rent’s going up.”	We'll need to find someone else if we want to keep living here.

thing that met his glance was a photograph of Rosalind that he had intended to have framed, propped up against a mirror on his dresser.	Amory walked into his bedroom. The first thing that met his glance was a photograph of Rosalind that he had intended to have framed, propped up against a mirror on his dresser. He looked at it unmoved.	The first thing he saw was a photograph of Rosalind he was going to frame, leaning against his dresser mirror.

looked at it unmoved.	The first thing that met his glance was a photograph of Rosalind that he had intended to have framed, propped up against a mirror on his dresser. He looked at it unmoved. After the vivid mental pictures of her that were his portion at present, the portrait was curiously unreal.	He looked at it without any emotion.

was curiously unreal.	He looked at it unmoved. After the vivid mental pictures of her that were his portion at present, the portrait was curiously unreal. He went back into the study.	seemed strangely fake.

the vivid mental pictures	He looked at it unmoved. After the vivid mental pictures of her that were his portion at present, the portrait was curiously unreal. He went back into the study.	the strong images in his mind

a cardboard box	He went back into the study. “Got a cardboard box?” “No,” answered Tom, puzzled.	A cardboard box.

one in Alec’s room.”	“Why should I have? Oh, yes—there may be one in Alec’s room.” Eventually Amory found what he was looking for and, returning to his dresser, opened a drawer full of letters, notes, part of a chain, two little handkerchiefs, and some snapshots.	one in Alec's room.

Alec’s room	“Why should I have? Oh, yes—there may be one in Alec’s room.” Eventually Amory found what he was looking for and, returning to his dresser, opened a drawer full of letters, notes, part of a chain, two little handkerchiefs, and some snapshots.	Alec's room

returning to his dresser, opened a drawer full of letters, notes, part of a chain, two little handkerchiefs, and some snapshots.	Oh, yes—there may be one in Alec’s room.” Eventually Amory found what he was looking for and, returning to his dresser, opened a drawer full of letters, notes, part of a chain, two little handkerchiefs, and some snapshots. As he transferred them carefully to the box his mind wandered to some place in a book where the hero, after preserving for a year a cake of his lost love’s soap, finally washed his hands with it.	He went back to his dresser and opened a drawer filled with letters, notes, part of a chain, two small handkerchiefs, and some photos.

two little handkerchiefs	Oh, yes—there may be one in Alec’s room.” Eventually Amory found what he was looking for and, returning to his dresser, opened a drawer full of letters, notes, part of a chain, two little handkerchiefs, and some snapshots. As he transferred them carefully to the box his mind wandered to some place in a book where the hero, after preserving for a year a cake of his lost love’s soap, finally washed his hands with it.	Two small handkerchiefs

cake of his lost love’s soap, finally washed his hands with it.	Eventually Amory found what he was looking for and, returning to his dresser, opened a drawer full of letters, notes, part of a chain, two little handkerchiefs, and some snapshots. As he transferred them carefully to the box his mind wandered to some place in a book where the hero, after preserving for a year a cake of his lost love’s soap, finally washed his hands with it. He laughed and began to hum “After you’ve gone”.	cake of his lost love's soap, and finally washed his hands with it.

his lost love’s soap	Eventually Amory found what he was looking for and, returning to his dresser, opened a drawer full of letters, notes, part of a chain, two little handkerchiefs, and some snapshots. As he transferred them carefully to the box his mind wandered to some place in a book where the hero, after preserving for a year a cake of his lost love’s soap, finally washed his hands with it. He laughed and began to hum “After you’ve gone”.	the soap of the woman he had loved and lost

hum “After you’ve gone”.	As he transferred them carefully to the box his mind wandered to some place in a book where the hero, after preserving for a year a cake of his lost love’s soap, finally washed his hands with it. He laughed and began to hum “After you’ve gone”. ceased abruptly.	hum “After you’ve gone”.

Tom’s voice	“Going out?” Tom’s voice held an undertone of anxiety. “Uh-huh.”	Tom's voice

undertone of anxiety.	“Going out?” Tom’s voice held an undertone of anxiety. “Uh-huh.”	He sounded a little worried.

the Biltmore bar	Amory crossed the street and had a highball; then he walked to Washington Square and found a top seat on a bus. He disembarked at Forty-third Street and strolled to the Biltmore bar. “Hi, Amory!”	The Biltmore bar.

disembarked at Forty-third Street and strolled to the Biltmore bar.	Amory crossed the street and had a highball; then he walked to Washington Square and found a top seat on a bus. He disembarked at Forty-third Street and strolled to the Biltmore bar. “Hi, Amory!”	Got off the bus at Forty-third Street and walked casually to the Biltmore bar.

“Yo-ho! Waiter	“What’ll you have?” “Yo-ho! Waiter!”	“Yo-ho! Waiter!”

Amory’s sorrows	The advent of prohibition with the “thirsty-first” put a sudden stop to the submerging of Amory’s sorrows, and when he awoke one morning to find that the old bar-to-bar days were over, he had neither remorse for the past three weeks nor regret that their repetition was impossible. He had taken the most violent, if the weakest, method to shield himself from the stabs of memory, and while it was not a course he would have prescribed for others, he found in the end that it had done its business: he was over the first flush of pain.	Amory's sadness

had neither remorse for the past three weeks nor regret that their repetition was impossible.	The advent of prohibition with the “thirsty-first” put a sudden stop to the submerging of Amory’s sorrows, and when he awoke one morning to find that the old bar-to-bar days were over, he had neither remorse for the past three weeks nor regret that their repetition was impossible. He had taken the most violent, if the weakest, method to shield himself from the stabs of memory, and while it was not a course he would have prescribed for others, he found in the end that it had done its business: he was over the first flush of pain.	He didn't feel bad about the past three weeks, nor was he sorry that he couldn't do them again.

 The advent	The advent of prohibition with the “thirsty-first” put a sudden stop to the submerging of Amory’s sorrows, and when he awoke one morning to find that the old bar-to-bar days were over, he had neither remorse for the past three weeks nor regret that their repetition was impossible. He had taken the most violent, if the weakest, method to shield himself from the stabs of memory, and while it was not a course he would have prescribed for others, he found in the end that it had done its business: he was over the first flush of pain.	The beginning

method to shield himself from the stabs of memory, and while it was not a course he would have prescribed for others, he found in the end that it had done its business: he was over the first flush of pain.	The advent of prohibition with the “thirsty-first” put a sudden stop to the submerging of Amory’s sorrows, and when he awoke one morning to find that the old bar-to-bar days were over, he had neither remorse for the past three weeks nor regret that their repetition was impossible. He had taken the most violent, if the weakest, method to shield himself from the stabs of memory, and while it was not a course he would have prescribed for others, he found in the end that it had done its business: he was over the first flush of pain. Don’t misunderstand!	He used a way to protect himself from painful memories, and although he wouldn't recommend it to others, he found that it worked: the initial pain had passed.

his unplumbed depths tenderness	Amory had loved Rosalind as he would never love another living person. She had taken the first flush of his youth and brought from his unplumbed depths tenderness that had surprised him, gentleness and unselfishness that he had never given to another creature. He had later love-affairs, but of a different sort: in those he went back to that, perhaps, more typical frame of mind, in which the girl became the mirror of a mood in him.	his deepest, unexplored emotions of tenderness

flush of his youth and brought from his unplumbed depths tenderness that had surprised him, gentleness and unselfishness that he had never given to another creature.	Amory had loved Rosalind as he would never love another living person. She had taken the first flush of his youth and brought from his unplumbed depths tenderness that had surprised him, gentleness and unselfishness that he had never given to another creature. He had later love-affairs, but of a different sort: in those he went back to that, perhaps, more typical frame of mind, in which the girl became the mirror of a mood in him.	the beginning of his youth and gave him tenderness, kindness, and selflessness he had never shown anyone else.

those he went back to that, perhaps, more typical frame of mind, in which the girl became the mirror of a mood in him.	She had taken the first flush of his youth and brought from his unplumbed depths tenderness that had surprised him, gentleness and unselfishness that he had never given to another creature. He had later love-affairs, but of a different sort: in those he went back to that, perhaps, more typical frame of mind, in which the girl became the mirror of a mood in him. Rosalind had drawn out what was more than passionate admiration; he had a deep, undying affection for Rosalind.	In those relationships, he went back to his more usual way of thinking, where the girl reflected his own feelings.

affection for Rosalind.	He had later love-affairs, but of a different sort: in those he went back to that, perhaps, more typical frame of mind, in which the girl became the mirror of a mood in him. Rosalind had drawn out what was more than passionate admiration; he had a deep, undying affection for Rosalind. But there had been, near the end, so much dramatic tragedy, culminating in the arabesque nightmare of his three weeks’ spree, that he was emotionally worn out.	He loved Rosalind.

passionate admiration	He had later love-affairs, but of a different sort: in those he went back to that, perhaps, more typical frame of mind, in which the girl became the mirror of a mood in him. Rosalind had drawn out what was more than passionate admiration; he had a deep, undying affection for Rosalind. But there had been, near the end, so much dramatic tragedy, culminating in the arabesque nightmare of his three weeks’ spree, that he was emotionally worn out.	Strong attraction

a deep, undying affection	He had later love-affairs, but of a different sort: in those he went back to that, perhaps, more typical frame of mind, in which the girl became the mirror of a mood in him. Rosalind had drawn out what was more than passionate admiration; he had a deep, undying affection for Rosalind. But there had been, near the end, so much dramatic tragedy, culminating in the arabesque nightmare of his three weeks’ spree, that he was emotionally worn out.	A deep, lasting love

nightmare of his three weeks’ spree, that he was emotionally worn out.	Rosalind had drawn out what was more than passionate admiration; he had a deep, undying affection for Rosalind. But there had been, near the end, so much dramatic tragedy, culminating in the arabesque nightmare of his three weeks’ spree, that he was emotionally worn out. The people and surroundings that he remembered as being cool or delicately artificial, seemed to promise him a refuge.	the terrible experience of his three-week binge, that he was emotionally exhausted.

his three weeks’ spree	Rosalind had drawn out what was more than passionate admiration; he had a deep, undying affection for Rosalind. But there had been, near the end, so much dramatic tragedy, culminating in the arabesque nightmare of his three weeks’ spree, that he was emotionally worn out. The people and surroundings that he remembered as being cool or delicately artificial, seemed to promise him a refuge.	his three-week drinking binge

the arabesque nightmare	Rosalind had drawn out what was more than passionate admiration; he had a deep, undying affection for Rosalind. But there had been, near the end, so much dramatic tragedy, culminating in the arabesque nightmare of his three weeks’ spree, that he was emotionally worn out. The people and surroundings that he remembered as being cool or delicately artificial, seemed to promise him a refuge.	The complicated, confusing nightmare

people and surroundings that he remembered as being cool or delicately artificial, seemed to promise him a refuge.	But there had been, near the end, so much dramatic tragedy, culminating in the arabesque nightmare of his three weeks’ spree, that he was emotionally worn out. The people and surroundings that he remembered as being cool or delicately artificial, seemed to promise him a refuge. He wrote a cynical story which featured his father’s funeral and despatched it to a magazine, receiving in return a check for sixty dollars and a request for more of the same tone.	The people and places he remembered as calm or subtly fake seemed to offer him a safe place.

sixty dollars	The people and surroundings that he remembered as being cool or delicately artificial, seemed to promise him a refuge. He wrote a cynical story which featured his father’s funeral and despatched it to a magazine, receiving in return a check for sixty dollars and a request for more of the same tone. This tickled his vanity, but inspired him to no further effort.	sixty dollars

his father’s funeral	The people and surroundings that he remembered as being cool or delicately artificial, seemed to promise him a refuge. He wrote a cynical story which featured his father’s funeral and despatched it to a magazine, receiving in return a check for sixty dollars and a request for more of the same tone. This tickled his vanity, but inspired him to no further effort.	his father's funeral

more of the same tone.	The people and surroundings that he remembered as being cool or delicately artificial, seemed to promise him a refuge. He wrote a cynical story which featured his father’s funeral and despatched it to a magazine, receiving in return a check for sixty dollars and a request for more of the same tone. This tickled his vanity, but inspired him to no further effort.	More stories like that.

a cynical story	The people and surroundings that he remembered as being cool or delicately artificial, seemed to promise him a refuge. He wrote a cynical story which featured his father’s funeral and despatched it to a magazine, receiving in return a check for sixty dollars and a request for more of the same tone. This tickled his vanity, but inspired him to no further effort.	A sarcastic story

inspired him to no further effort.	He wrote a cynical story which featured his father’s funeral and despatched it to a magazine, receiving in return a check for sixty dollars and a request for more of the same tone. This tickled his vanity, but inspired him to no further effort. He read enormously.	He didn't try to write anything else.

surprised by his discovery through a critic named Mencken of several excellent American novels:	He read enormously. He was puzzled and depressed by A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man; intensely interested by Joan and Peter and The Undying Fire, and rather surprised by his discovery through a critic named Mencken of several excellent American novels: Vandover and the Brute, The Damnation of Theron Ware, and Jennie Gerhardt.	surprised to find out about several great American novels thanks to a critic named Mencken:

The Undying Fire	He read enormously. He was puzzled and depressed by A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man; intensely interested by Joan and Peter and The Undying Fire, and rather surprised by his discovery through a critic named Mencken of several excellent American novels: Vandover and the Brute, The Damnation of Theron Ware, and Jennie Gerhardt.	The Undying Fire

Brute, The Damnation of Theron Ware, and Jennie Gerhardt.	He was puzzled and depressed by A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man; intensely interested by Joan and Peter and The Undying Fire, and rather surprised by his discovery through a critic named Mencken of several excellent American novels: Vandover and the Brute, The Damnation of Theron Ware, and Jennie Gerhardt. Mackenzie, Chesterton, Galsworthy, Bennett, had sunk in his appreciation from sagacious, life-saturated geniuses to merely diverting contemporaries.	Vandover and the Brute, The Damnation of Theron Ware, and Jennie Gerhardt.

sunk in his appreciation from sagacious, life-saturated geniuses to merely diverting contemporaries.	Vandover and the Brute, The Damnation of Theron Ware, and Jennie Gerhardt. Mackenzie, Chesterton, Galsworthy, Bennett, had sunk in his appreciation from sagacious, life-saturated geniuses to merely diverting contemporaries. Shaw’s aloof clarity and brilliant consistency and the gloriously intoxicated efforts of H. G. Wells to fit the key of romantic symmetry into the elusive lock of truth, alone won his rapt attention.	He no longer thought they were brilliant, wise geniuses who understood life, but just entertaining writers of his time.

sagacious, life-saturated geniuses	Vandover and the Brute, The Damnation of Theron Ware, and Jennie Gerhardt. Mackenzie, Chesterton, Galsworthy, Bennett, had sunk in his appreciation from sagacious, life-saturated geniuses to merely diverting contemporaries. Shaw’s aloof clarity and brilliant consistency and the gloriously intoxicated efforts of H. G. Wells to fit the key of romantic symmetry into the elusive lock of truth, alone won his rapt attention.	wise, deeply insightful geniuses

the elusive lock	Mackenzie, Chesterton, Galsworthy, Bennett, had sunk in his appreciation from sagacious, life-saturated geniuses to merely diverting contemporaries. Shaw’s aloof clarity and brilliant consistency and the gloriously intoxicated efforts of H. G. Wells to fit the key of romantic symmetry into the elusive lock of truth, alone won his rapt attention. He wanted to see Monsignor Darcy, to whom he had written when he landed, but he had not heard from him; besides he knew that a visit to Monsignor would entail the story of Rosalind, and the thought of repeating it turned him cold with horror.	the hard-to-find keyhole

Shaw’s aloof clarity	Mackenzie, Chesterton, Galsworthy, Bennett, had sunk in his appreciation from sagacious, life-saturated geniuses to merely diverting contemporaries. Shaw’s aloof clarity and brilliant consistency and the gloriously intoxicated efforts of H. G. Wells to fit the key of romantic symmetry into the elusive lock of truth, alone won his rapt attention. He wanted to see Monsignor Darcy, to whom he had written when he landed, but he had not heard from him; besides he knew that a visit to Monsignor would entail the story of Rosalind, and the thought of repeating it turned him cold with horror.	Shaw's detached clarity

the gloriously intoxicated efforts	Mackenzie, Chesterton, Galsworthy, Bennett, had sunk in his appreciation from sagacious, life-saturated geniuses to merely diverting contemporaries. Shaw’s aloof clarity and brilliant consistency and the gloriously intoxicated efforts of H. G. Wells to fit the key of romantic symmetry into the elusive lock of truth, alone won his rapt attention. He wanted to see Monsignor Darcy, to whom he had written when he landed, but he had not heard from him; besides he knew that a visit to Monsignor would entail the story of Rosalind, and the thought of repeating it turned him cold with horror.	the wonderfully enthusiastic attempts

his rapt attention	Mackenzie, Chesterton, Galsworthy, Bennett, had sunk in his appreciation from sagacious, life-saturated geniuses to merely diverting contemporaries. Shaw’s aloof clarity and brilliant consistency and the gloriously intoxicated efforts of H. G. Wells to fit the key of romantic symmetry into the elusive lock of truth, alone won his rapt attention. He wanted to see Monsignor Darcy, to whom he had written when he landed, but he had not heard from him; besides he knew that a visit to Monsignor would entail the story of Rosalind, and the thought of repeating it turned him cold with horror.	He was completely focused.

efforts of H. G. Wells to fit the key of romantic symmetry into the elusive lock of truth, alone won his rapt attention.	Mackenzie, Chesterton, Galsworthy, Bennett, had sunk in his appreciation from sagacious, life-saturated geniuses to merely diverting contemporaries. Shaw’s aloof clarity and brilliant consistency and the gloriously intoxicated efforts of H. G. Wells to fit the key of romantic symmetry into the elusive lock of truth, alone won his rapt attention. He wanted to see Monsignor Darcy, to whom he had written when he landed, but he had not heard from him; besides he knew that a visit to Monsignor would entail the story of Rosalind, and the thought of repeating it turned him cold with horror.	H. G. Wells' attempts to find a perfect, romantic pattern in the difficult truth were the only things that really interested him.

romantic symmetry	Mackenzie, Chesterton, Galsworthy, Bennett, had sunk in his appreciation from sagacious, life-saturated geniuses to merely diverting contemporaries. Shaw’s aloof clarity and brilliant consistency and the gloriously intoxicated efforts of H. G. Wells to fit the key of romantic symmetry into the elusive lock of truth, alone won his rapt attention. He wanted to see Monsignor Darcy, to whom he had written when he landed, but he had not heard from him; besides he knew that a visit to Monsignor would entail the story of Rosalind, and the thought of repeating it turned him cold with horror.	ideal balance

Darcy, to whom he had written when he landed, but he had not heard from him; besides he knew that a visit to Monsignor would entail the story of Rosalind, and the thought of repeating it turned him cold with horror.	Shaw’s aloof clarity and brilliant consistency and the gloriously intoxicated efforts of H. G. Wells to fit the key of romantic symmetry into the elusive lock of truth, alone won his rapt attention. He wanted to see Monsignor Darcy, to whom he had written when he landed, but he had not heard from him; besides he knew that a visit to Monsignor would entail the story of Rosalind, and the thought of repeating it turned him cold with horror. In his search for cool people he remembered Mrs. Lawrence, a very intelligent, very dignified lady, a convert to the church, and a great devotee of Monsignor’s.	He hadn't heard back from Darcy, whom he had written to when he arrived. Also, he knew that visiting the Monsignor would mean he'd have to tell the story of Rosalind, and the idea of repeating it filled him with dread.

Lawrence, a very intelligent, very dignified lady, a convert to the church, and a great devotee of Monsignor’s.	He wanted to see Monsignor Darcy, to whom he had written when he landed, but he had not heard from him; besides he knew that a visit to Monsignor would entail the story of Rosalind, and the thought of repeating it turned him cold with horror. In his search for cool people he remembered Mrs. Lawrence, a very intelligent, very dignified lady, a convert to the church, and a great devotee of Monsignor’s. He called her on the phone one day.	Mrs. Lawrence was a very intelligent and dignified woman who had converted to the church and was a big fan of the Monsignor.

a very intelligent, very dignified lady	He wanted to see Monsignor Darcy, to whom he had written when he landed, but he had not heard from him; besides he knew that a visit to Monsignor would entail the story of Rosalind, and the thought of repeating it turned him cold with horror. In his search for cool people he remembered Mrs. Lawrence, a very intelligent, very dignified lady, a convert to the church, and a great devotee of Monsignor’s. He called her on the phone one day.	A very intelligent and dignified lady.

a great devotee	He wanted to see Monsignor Darcy, to whom he had written when he landed, but he had not heard from him; besides he knew that a visit to Monsignor would entail the story of Rosalind, and the thought of repeating it turned him cold with horror. In his search for cool people he remembered Mrs. Lawrence, a very intelligent, very dignified lady, a convert to the church, and a great devotee of Monsignor’s. He called her on the phone one day.	a big fan

take luncheon with her?	he’d promised to come to dinner when he returned. Couldn’t Amory take luncheon with her? “I thought I’d better catch up, Mrs. Lawrence,” he said rather ambiguously when he arrived.	Have lunch with her?

said rather ambiguously when he arrived.	Couldn’t Amory take luncheon with her? “I thought I’d better catch up, Mrs. Lawrence,” he said rather ambiguously when he arrived. “Monsignor was here just last week,” said Mrs. Lawrence regretfully.	He said it in a way that wasn't very clear when he arrived.

plunged into Bolshevism?” asked Amory, interested.	“He was very anxious to see you, but he’d left your address at home.” “Did he think I’d plunged into Bolshevism?” asked Amory, interested. “Oh, he’s having a frightful time.”	Did he think I became a Bolshevik?" asked Amory, interested.

a frightful time	“Did he think I’d plunged into Bolshevism?” asked Amory, interested. “Oh, he’s having a frightful time.” “Why?”	He's having a terrible time.

went to Boston when the Irish President arrived and he was greatly distressed because the receiving committee, when they rode in an automobile, would put their arms around the President.”	He thinks it lacks dignity.” “So?” “He went to Boston when the Irish President arrived and he was greatly distressed because the receiving committee, when they rode in an automobile, would put their arms around the President.” “I don’t blame him.”	He went to Boston when the Irish President was there, and he was very upset because the people welcoming him would put their arms around the President when they were in a car.

impressed you more than anything while you were in the army?	“I don’t blame him.” “Well, what impressed you more than anything while you were in the army? You look a great deal older.”	What in the army impressed you the most?

, more disastrous battle	You look a great deal older.” “That’s from another, more disastrous battle,” he answered, smiling in spite of himself. “But the army—let me see—well, I discovered that physical courage depends to a great extent on the physical shape a man is in.	, a more disastrous battle

spite of himself.	You look a great deal older.” “That’s from another, more disastrous battle,” he answered, smiling in spite of himself. “But the army—let me see—well, I discovered that physical courage depends to a great extent on the physical shape a man is in.	Even though he didn't want to.

extent on the physical shape a man is in.	“That’s from another, more disastrous battle,” he answered, smiling in spite of himself. “But the army—let me see—well, I discovered that physical courage depends to a great extent on the physical shape a man is in. I found that I was as brave as the next man—it used to worry me before.”	on how physically fit a man is.

brave as the next man—it used to worry me before.”	“But the army—let me see—well, I discovered that physical courage depends to a great extent on the physical shape a man is in. I found that I was as brave as the next man—it used to worry me before.” “What else?”	I was as brave as anyone else, which used to bother me.

idea that men can stand anything if they get used to it, and the fact that I got a high mark in the psychological examination.”	“What else?” “Well, the idea that men can stand anything if they get used to it, and the fact that I got a high mark in the psychological examination.” Mrs. Lawrence laughed.	The idea that men can endure anything if they get used to it, and the fact that I scored well on the psychology test.

more condensed New York	Mrs. Lawrence laughed. Amory was finding it a great relief to be in this cool house on Riverside Drive, away from more condensed New York and the sense of people expelling great quantities of breath into a little space. Mrs. Lawrence reminded him vaguely of Beatrice, not in temperament, but in her perfect grace and dignity.	New York with more people

expelling great quantities of breath into a little space.	Mrs. Lawrence laughed. Amory was finding it a great relief to be in this cool house on Riverside Drive, away from more condensed New York and the sense of people expelling great quantities of breath into a little space. Mrs. Lawrence reminded him vaguely of Beatrice, not in temperament, but in her perfect grace and dignity.	breathing a lot in a small area.

vaguely of Beatrice, not in temperament, but in her perfect grace and dignity.	Amory was finding it a great relief to be in this cool house on Riverside Drive, away from more condensed New York and the sense of people expelling great quantities of breath into a little space. Mrs. Lawrence reminded him vaguely of Beatrice, not in temperament, but in her perfect grace and dignity. The house, its furnishings, the manner in which dinner was served, were in immense contrast to what he had met in the great places on Long Island, where the servants were so obtrusive that they had positively to be bumped out of the way, or even in the houses of more conservative “Union Club” families.	Reminded him a little of Beatrice, not in personality, but in her elegant poise and self-respect.

more conservative “Union Club” families	Mrs. Lawrence reminded him vaguely of Beatrice, not in temperament, but in her perfect grace and dignity. The house, its furnishings, the manner in which dinner was served, were in immense contrast to what he had met in the great places on Long Island, where the servants were so obtrusive that they had positively to be bumped out of the way, or even in the houses of more conservative “Union Club” families. He wondered if this air of symmetrical restraint, this grace, which he felt was continental, was distilled through Mrs. Lawrence’s New England ancestry or acquired in long residence in Italy and Spain.	families that were more traditional and belonged to the "Union Club"

furnishings, the manner in which dinner was served, were in immense contrast to what he had met in the great places on Long Island, where the servants were so obtrusive that they had positively to be bumped out of the way, or even in the houses of more conservative “Union Club” families.	Mrs. Lawrence reminded him vaguely of Beatrice, not in temperament, but in her perfect grace and dignity. The house, its furnishings, the manner in which dinner was served, were in immense contrast to what he had met in the great places on Long Island, where the servants were so obtrusive that they had positively to be bumped out of the way, or even in the houses of more conservative “Union Club” families. He wondered if this air of symmetrical restraint, this grace, which he felt was continental, was distilled through Mrs. Lawrence’s New England ancestry or acquired in long residence in Italy and Spain.	The furniture and the way dinner was served were very different from what he had seen in the big houses on Long Island, where the servants were so pushy that you practically had to push them aside, or even in the homes of more traditional “Union Club” families.

immense contrast	Mrs. Lawrence reminded him vaguely of Beatrice, not in temperament, but in her perfect grace and dignity. The house, its furnishings, the manner in which dinner was served, were in immense contrast to what he had met in the great places on Long Island, where the servants were so obtrusive that they had positively to be bumped out of the way, or even in the houses of more conservative “Union Club” families. He wondered if this air of symmetrical restraint, this grace, which he felt was continental, was distilled through Mrs. Lawrence’s New England ancestry or acquired in long residence in Italy and Spain.	a huge difference

Mrs. Lawrence’s New England ancestry	The house, its furnishings, the manner in which dinner was served, were in immense contrast to what he had met in the great places on Long Island, where the servants were so obtrusive that they had positively to be bumped out of the way, or even in the houses of more conservative “Union Club” families. He wondered if this air of symmetrical restraint, this grace, which he felt was continental, was distilled through Mrs. Lawrence’s New England ancestry or acquired in long residence in Italy and Spain. Two glasses of sauterne at luncheon loosened his tongue, and he talked, with what he felt was something of his old charm, of religion and literature and the menacing phenomena of the social order.	Mrs. Lawrence's family history from New England.

symmetrical restraint	The house, its furnishings, the manner in which dinner was served, were in immense contrast to what he had met in the great places on Long Island, where the servants were so obtrusive that they had positively to be bumped out of the way, or even in the houses of more conservative “Union Club” families. He wondered if this air of symmetrical restraint, this grace, which he felt was continental, was distilled through Mrs. Lawrence’s New England ancestry or acquired in long residence in Italy and Spain. Two glasses of sauterne at luncheon loosened his tongue, and he talked, with what he felt was something of his old charm, of religion and literature and the menacing phenomena of the social order.	Balanced calmness

air of symmetrical restraint, this grace, which he felt was continental, was distilled through Mrs. Lawrence’s New England ancestry or acquired in long residence in Italy and Spain.	The house, its furnishings, the manner in which dinner was served, were in immense contrast to what he had met in the great places on Long Island, where the servants were so obtrusive that they had positively to be bumped out of the way, or even in the houses of more conservative “Union Club” families. He wondered if this air of symmetrical restraint, this grace, which he felt was continental, was distilled through Mrs. Lawrence’s New England ancestry or acquired in long residence in Italy and Spain. Two glasses of sauterne at luncheon loosened his tongue, and he talked, with what he felt was something of his old charm, of religion and literature and the menacing phenomena of the social order.	The feeling of balanced control, this elegance that seemed European, did it come from Mrs. Lawrence's New England background or from living in Italy and Spain for a long time?

the menacing phenomena	He wondered if this air of symmetrical restraint, this grace, which he felt was continental, was distilled through Mrs. Lawrence’s New England ancestry or acquired in long residence in Italy and Spain. Two glasses of sauterne at luncheon loosened his tongue, and he talked, with what he felt was something of his old charm, of religion and literature and the menacing phenomena of the social order. Mrs. Lawrence was ostensibly pleased with him, and her interest was especially in his mind; he wanted people to like his mind again—after a while it might be such a nice place in which to live.	the threatening problems

talked, with what he felt was something of his old charm, of religion and literature and the menacing phenomena of the social order.	He wondered if this air of symmetrical restraint, this grace, which he felt was continental, was distilled through Mrs. Lawrence’s New England ancestry or acquired in long residence in Italy and Spain. Two glasses of sauterne at luncheon loosened his tongue, and he talked, with what he felt was something of his old charm, of religion and literature and the menacing phenomena of the social order. Mrs. Lawrence was ostensibly pleased with him, and her interest was especially in his mind; he wanted people to like his mind again—after a while it might be such a nice place in which to live.	He talked, with what he thought was some of his old charm, about religion, literature, and the threatening problems of society.

pagan at present.	“Perhaps,” he assented. “I’m rather pagan at present. It’s just that religion doesn’t seem to have the slightest bearing on life at my age.”	I'm a non-religious person right now.

bearing on life at my age.”	“I’m rather pagan at present. It’s just that religion doesn’t seem to have the slightest bearing on life at my age.” When he left her house he walked down Riverside Drive with a feeling of satisfaction.	relevance to life at my age."

poet, Stephen Vincent Benet, or the Irish Republic.	When he left her house he walked down Riverside Drive with a feeling of satisfaction. It was amusing to discuss again such subjects as this young poet, Stephen Vincent Benet, or the Irish Republic. Between the rancid accusations of Edward Carson and Justice Cohalan he had completely tired of the Irish question; yet there had been a time when his own Celtic traits were pillars of his personal philosophy.	the poet, Stephen Vincent Benet, or the Irish Republic.

the rancid accusations	It was amusing to discuss again such subjects as this young poet, Stephen Vincent Benet, or the Irish Republic. Between the rancid accusations of Edward Carson and Justice Cohalan he had completely tired of the Irish question; yet there had been a time when his own Celtic traits were pillars of his personal philosophy. There seemed suddenly to be much left in life, if only this revival of old interests did not mean that he was backing away from it again—backing away from life itself.	the hateful accusations

time when his own Celtic traits were pillars of his personal philosophy.	It was amusing to discuss again such subjects as this young poet, Stephen Vincent Benet, or the Irish Republic. Between the rancid accusations of Edward Carson and Justice Cohalan he had completely tired of the Irish question; yet there had been a time when his own Celtic traits were pillars of his personal philosophy. There seemed suddenly to be much left in life, if only this revival of old interests did not mean that he was backing away from it again—backing away from life itself.	a time when his own Irish heritage was a core part of his beliefs.

his own Celtic traits	It was amusing to discuss again such subjects as this young poet, Stephen Vincent Benet, or the Irish Republic. Between the rancid accusations of Edward Carson and Justice Cohalan he had completely tired of the Irish question; yet there had been a time when his own Celtic traits were pillars of his personal philosophy. There seemed suddenly to be much left in life, if only this revival of old interests did not mean that he was backing away from it again—backing away from life itself.	his own Irish heritage

only this revival	Between the rancid accusations of Edward Carson and Justice Cohalan he had completely tired of the Irish question; yet there had been a time when his own Celtic traits were pillars of his personal philosophy. There seemed suddenly to be much left in life, if only this revival of old interests did not mean that he was backing away from it again—backing away from life itself.	only this comeback

said Amory one day, stretching himself at ease in the comfortable window-seat.	“I’m tres old and tres bored, Tom,” said Amory one day, stretching himself at ease in the comfortable window-seat. He always felt most natural in a recumbent position.	Amory said one day, stretching out comfortably in the window seat.

a recumbent position	“I’m tres old and tres bored, Tom,” said Amory one day, stretching himself at ease in the comfortable window-seat. He always felt most natural in a recumbent position. “You used to be entertaining before you started to write,” he continued.	lying down

felt most natural in a recumbent position.	“I’m tres old and tres bored, Tom,” said Amory one day, stretching himself at ease in the comfortable window-seat. He always felt most natural in a recumbent position. “You used to be entertaining before you started to write,” he continued.	felt most natural lying down.

idea that you think would do to print.”	“You used to be entertaining before you started to write,” he continued. “Now you save any idea that you think would do to print.” Existence had settled back to an ambitionless normality.	idea that you think would be good enough to publish.

an ambitionless normality	“Now you save any idea that you think would do to print.” Existence had settled back to an ambitionless normality. They had decided that with economy they could still afford the apartment, which Tom, with the domesticity of an elderly cat, had grown fond of.	A normal life without big goals.

back to an ambitionless normality.	“Now you save any idea that you think would do to print.” Existence had settled back to an ambitionless normality. They had decided that with economy they could still afford the apartment, which Tom, with the domesticity of an elderly cat, had grown fond of.	back to a normal life without big goals.

fond of.	Existence had settled back to an ambitionless normality. They had decided that with economy they could still afford the apartment, which Tom, with the domesticity of an elderly cat, had grown fond of. The old English hunting prints on the wall were Tom’s, and the large tapestry by courtesy, a relic of decadent days in college, and the great profusion of orphaned candlesticks and the carved Louis XV chair in which no one could sit more than a minute without acute spinal disorders—Tom claimed that this was because one was sitting in the lap of Montespan’s wraith—at any rate, it was Tom’s furniture that decided them to stay.	liked it.

The old English hunting prints	They had decided that with economy they could still afford the apartment, which Tom, with the domesticity of an elderly cat, had grown fond of. The old English hunting prints on the wall were Tom’s, and the large tapestry by courtesy, a relic of decadent days in college, and the great profusion of orphaned candlesticks and the carved Louis XV chair in which no one could sit more than a minute without acute spinal disorders—Tom claimed that this was because one was sitting in the lap of Montespan’s wraith—at any rate, it was Tom’s furniture that decided them to stay. They went out very little: to an occasional play, or to dinner at the Ritz or the Princeton Club.	The old English hunting prints

the carved Louis XV chair	They had decided that with economy they could still afford the apartment, which Tom, with the domesticity of an elderly cat, had grown fond of. The old English hunting prints on the wall were Tom’s, and the large tapestry by courtesy, a relic of decadent days in college, and the great profusion of orphaned candlesticks and the carved Louis XV chair in which no one could sit more than a minute without acute spinal disorders—Tom claimed that this was because one was sitting in the lap of Montespan’s wraith—at any rate, it was Tom’s furniture that decided them to stay. They went out very little: to an occasional play, or to dinner at the Ritz or the Princeton Club.	the carved Louis XV chair

Tom’s furniture	They had decided that with economy they could still afford the apartment, which Tom, with the domesticity of an elderly cat, had grown fond of. The old English hunting prints on the wall were Tom’s, and the large tapestry by courtesy, a relic of decadent days in college, and the great profusion of orphaned candlesticks and the carved Louis XV chair in which no one could sit more than a minute without acute spinal disorders—Tom claimed that this was because one was sitting in the lap of Montespan’s wraith—at any rate, it was Tom’s furniture that decided them to stay. They went out very little: to an occasional play, or to dinner at the Ritz or the Princeton Club.	Tom's furniture

Montespan’s wraith	They had decided that with economy they could still afford the apartment, which Tom, with the domesticity of an elderly cat, had grown fond of. The old English hunting prints on the wall were Tom’s, and the large tapestry by courtesy, a relic of decadent days in college, and the great profusion of orphaned candlesticks and the carved Louis XV chair in which no one could sit more than a minute without acute spinal disorders—Tom claimed that this was because one was sitting in the lap of Montespan’s wraith—at any rate, it was Tom’s furniture that decided them to stay. They went out very little: to an occasional play, or to dinner at the Ritz or the Princeton Club.	Montespan's ghost

orphaned candlesticks	They had decided that with economy they could still afford the apartment, which Tom, with the domesticity of an elderly cat, had grown fond of. The old English hunting prints on the wall were Tom’s, and the large tapestry by courtesy, a relic of decadent days in college, and the great profusion of orphaned candlesticks and the carved Louis XV chair in which no one could sit more than a minute without acute spinal disorders—Tom claimed that this was because one was sitting in the lap of Montespan’s wraith—at any rate, it was Tom’s furniture that decided them to stay. They went out very little: to an occasional play, or to dinner at the Ritz or the Princeton Club.	Candlesticks that no one owned

was because one was sitting in the lap of Montespan’s wraith—at any rate, it was Tom’s furniture that decided them to stay.	They had decided that with economy they could still afford the apartment, which Tom, with the domesticity of an elderly cat, had grown fond of. The old English hunting prints on the wall were Tom’s, and the large tapestry by courtesy, a relic of decadent days in college, and the great profusion of orphaned candlesticks and the carved Louis XV chair in which no one could sit more than a minute without acute spinal disorders—Tom claimed that this was because one was sitting in the lap of Montespan’s wraith—at any rate, it was Tom’s furniture that decided them to stay. They went out very little: to an occasional play, or to dinner at the Ritz or the Princeton Club.	The reason was that someone was sitting in the ghost of Montespan's lap, but anyway, it was Tom’s furniture that made them stay.

decadent days	They had decided that with economy they could still afford the apartment, which Tom, with the domesticity of an elderly cat, had grown fond of. The old English hunting prints on the wall were Tom’s, and the large tapestry by courtesy, a relic of decadent days in college, and the great profusion of orphaned candlesticks and the carved Louis XV chair in which no one could sit more than a minute without acute spinal disorders—Tom claimed that this was because one was sitting in the lap of Montespan’s wraith—at any rate, it was Tom’s furniture that decided them to stay. They went out very little: to an occasional play, or to dinner at the Ritz or the Princeton Club.	Days of being wild or extravagant

acute spinal disorders	They had decided that with economy they could still afford the apartment, which Tom, with the domesticity of an elderly cat, had grown fond of. The old English hunting prints on the wall were Tom’s, and the large tapestry by courtesy, a relic of decadent days in college, and the great profusion of orphaned candlesticks and the carved Louis XV chair in which no one could sit more than a minute without acute spinal disorders—Tom claimed that this was because one was sitting in the lap of Montespan’s wraith—at any rate, it was Tom’s furniture that decided them to stay. They went out very little: to an occasional play, or to dinner at the Ritz or the Princeton Club.	severe back problems

went out very little: to an occasional play, or to dinner at the Ritz or the Princeton Club.	The old English hunting prints on the wall were Tom’s, and the large tapestry by courtesy, a relic of decadent days in college, and the great profusion of orphaned candlesticks and the carved Louis XV chair in which no one could sit more than a minute without acute spinal disorders—Tom claimed that this was because one was sitting in the lap of Montespan’s wraith—at any rate, it was Tom’s furniture that decided them to stay. They went out very little: to an occasional play, or to dinner at the Ritz or the Princeton Club. With prohibition the great rendezvous had received their death wounds; no longer could one wander to the Biltmore bar at twelve or five and find congenial spirits, and both Tom and Amory had outgrown the passion for dancing with midwestern or New Jersey debbies at the Club-de-Vingt (surnamed the “Club de Gink”) or the Plaza Rose Room—besides even that required several cocktails “to come down to the intellectual level of the women present,” as Amory had once put it to a horrified matron.	They rarely went out: sometimes to a play or for dinner at the Ritz or the Princeton Club.

midwestern or New Jersey debbies	They went out very little: to an occasional play, or to dinner at the Ritz or the Princeton Club. With prohibition the great rendezvous had received their death wounds; no longer could one wander to the Biltmore bar at twelve or five and find congenial spirits, and both Tom and Amory had outgrown the passion for dancing with midwestern or New Jersey debbies at the Club-de-Vingt (surnamed the “Club de Gink”) or the Plaza Rose Room—besides even that required several cocktails “to come down to the intellectual level of the women present,” as Amory had once put it to a horrified matron. Amory had lately received several alarming letters from Mr. Barton—the Lake Geneva house was too large to be easily rented; the best rent obtainable at present would serve this year to little more than pay for the taxes and necessary improvements; in fact, the lawyer suggested that the whole property was simply a white elephant on Amory’s hands.	women from the Midwest or New Jersey

level of the women present,” as Amory had once put it to a horrified matron.	They went out very little: to an occasional play, or to dinner at the Ritz or the Princeton Club. With prohibition the great rendezvous had received their death wounds; no longer could one wander to the Biltmore bar at twelve or five and find congenial spirits, and both Tom and Amory had outgrown the passion for dancing with midwestern or New Jersey debbies at the Club-de-Vingt (surnamed the “Club de Gink”) or the Plaza Rose Room—besides even that required several cocktails “to come down to the intellectual level of the women present,” as Amory had once put it to a horrified matron. Amory had lately received several alarming letters from Mr. Barton—the Lake Geneva house was too large to be easily rented; the best rent obtainable at present would serve this year to little more than pay for the taxes and necessary improvements; in fact, the lawyer suggested that the whole property was simply a white elephant on Amory’s hands.	level of the women there," as Amory had once said to a horrified woman.

the great rendezvous	They went out very little: to an occasional play, or to dinner at the Ritz or the Princeton Club. With prohibition the great rendezvous had received their death wounds; no longer could one wander to the Biltmore bar at twelve or five and find congenial spirits, and both Tom and Amory had outgrown the passion for dancing with midwestern or New Jersey debbies at the Club-de-Vingt (surnamed the “Club de Gink”) or the Plaza Rose Room—besides even that required several cocktails “to come down to the intellectual level of the women present,” as Amory had once put it to a horrified matron. Amory had lately received several alarming letters from Mr. Barton—the Lake Geneva house was too large to be easily rented; the best rent obtainable at present would serve this year to little more than pay for the taxes and necessary improvements; in fact, the lawyer suggested that the whole property was simply a white elephant on Amory’s hands.	popular gathering places

the Biltmore bar	They went out very little: to an occasional play, or to dinner at the Ritz or the Princeton Club. With prohibition the great rendezvous had received their death wounds; no longer could one wander to the Biltmore bar at twelve or five and find congenial spirits, and both Tom and Amory had outgrown the passion for dancing with midwestern or New Jersey debbies at the Club-de-Vingt (surnamed the “Club de Gink”) or the Plaza Rose Room—besides even that required several cocktails “to come down to the intellectual level of the women present,” as Amory had once put it to a horrified matron. Amory had lately received several alarming letters from Mr. Barton—the Lake Geneva house was too large to be easily rented; the best rent obtainable at present would serve this year to little more than pay for the taxes and necessary improvements; in fact, the lawyer suggested that the whole property was simply a white elephant on Amory’s hands.	the bar at the Biltmore hotel

congenial spirits	They went out very little: to an occasional play, or to dinner at the Ritz or the Princeton Club. With prohibition the great rendezvous had received their death wounds; no longer could one wander to the Biltmore bar at twelve or five and find congenial spirits, and both Tom and Amory had outgrown the passion for dancing with midwestern or New Jersey debbies at the Club-de-Vingt (surnamed the “Club de Gink”) or the Plaza Rose Room—besides even that required several cocktails “to come down to the intellectual level of the women present,” as Amory had once put it to a horrified matron. Amory had lately received several alarming letters from Mr. Barton—the Lake Geneva house was too large to be easily rented; the best rent obtainable at present would serve this year to little more than pay for the taxes and necessary improvements; in fact, the lawyer suggested that the whole property was simply a white elephant on Amory’s hands.	Friendly people

the “Club de Gink	They went out very little: to an occasional play, or to dinner at the Ritz or the Princeton Club. With prohibition the great rendezvous had received their death wounds; no longer could one wander to the Biltmore bar at twelve or five and find congenial spirits, and both Tom and Amory had outgrown the passion for dancing with midwestern or New Jersey debbies at the Club-de-Vingt (surnamed the “Club de Gink”) or the Plaza Rose Room—besides even that required several cocktails “to come down to the intellectual level of the women present,” as Amory had once put it to a horrified matron. Amory had lately received several alarming letters from Mr. Barton—the Lake Geneva house was too large to be easily rented; the best rent obtainable at present would serve this year to little more than pay for the taxes and necessary improvements; in fact, the lawyer suggested that the whole property was simply a white elephant on Amory’s hands.	the "Club de Gink"

the Club-de-Vingt	They went out very little: to an occasional play, or to dinner at the Ritz or the Princeton Club. With prohibition the great rendezvous had received their death wounds; no longer could one wander to the Biltmore bar at twelve or five and find congenial spirits, and both Tom and Amory had outgrown the passion for dancing with midwestern or New Jersey debbies at the Club-de-Vingt (surnamed the “Club de Gink”) or the Plaza Rose Room—besides even that required several cocktails “to come down to the intellectual level of the women present,” as Amory had once put it to a horrified matron. Amory had lately received several alarming letters from Mr. Barton—the Lake Geneva house was too large to be easily rented; the best rent obtainable at present would serve this year to little more than pay for the taxes and necessary improvements; in fact, the lawyer suggested that the whole property was simply a white elephant on Amory’s hands.	the "Club de Gink"

a horrified matron	They went out very little: to an occasional play, or to dinner at the Ritz or the Princeton Club. With prohibition the great rendezvous had received their death wounds; no longer could one wander to the Biltmore bar at twelve or five and find congenial spirits, and both Tom and Amory had outgrown the passion for dancing with midwestern or New Jersey debbies at the Club-de-Vingt (surnamed the “Club de Gink”) or the Plaza Rose Room—besides even that required several cocktails “to come down to the intellectual level of the women present,” as Amory had once put it to a horrified matron. Amory had lately received several alarming letters from Mr. Barton—the Lake Geneva house was too large to be easily rented; the best rent obtainable at present would serve this year to little more than pay for the taxes and necessary improvements; in fact, the lawyer suggested that the whole property was simply a white elephant on Amory’s hands.	a shocked older woman

several alarming letters	With prohibition the great rendezvous had received their death wounds; no longer could one wander to the Biltmore bar at twelve or five and find congenial spirits, and both Tom and Amory had outgrown the passion for dancing with midwestern or New Jersey debbies at the Club-de-Vingt (surnamed the “Club de Gink”) or the Plaza Rose Room—besides even that required several cocktails “to come down to the intellectual level of the women present,” as Amory had once put it to a horrified matron. Amory had lately received several alarming letters from Mr. Barton—the Lake Geneva house was too large to be easily rented; the best rent obtainable at present would serve this year to little more than pay for the taxes and necessary improvements; in fact, the lawyer suggested that the whole property was simply a white elephant on Amory’s hands. Nevertheless, even though it might not yield a cent for the next three years, Amory decided with a vague sentimentality that for the present, at any rate, he would not sell the house.	some worrying letters

Amory’s hands	With prohibition the great rendezvous had received their death wounds; no longer could one wander to the Biltmore bar at twelve or five and find congenial spirits, and both Tom and Amory had outgrown the passion for dancing with midwestern or New Jersey debbies at the Club-de-Vingt (surnamed the “Club de Gink”) or the Plaza Rose Room—besides even that required several cocktails “to come down to the intellectual level of the women present,” as Amory had once put it to a horrified matron. Amory had lately received several alarming letters from Mr. Barton—the Lake Geneva house was too large to be easily rented; the best rent obtainable at present would serve this year to little more than pay for the taxes and necessary improvements; in fact, the lawyer suggested that the whole property was simply a white elephant on Amory’s hands. Nevertheless, even though it might not yield a cent for the next three years, Amory decided with a vague sentimentality that for the present, at any rate, he would not sell the house.	Amory's possession

obtainable at present would serve this year to little more than pay for the taxes and necessary improvements; in fact, the lawyer suggested that the whole property was simply a white elephant on Amory’s hands.	With prohibition the great rendezvous had received their death wounds; no longer could one wander to the Biltmore bar at twelve or five and find congenial spirits, and both Tom and Amory had outgrown the passion for dancing with midwestern or New Jersey debbies at the Club-de-Vingt (surnamed the “Club de Gink”) or the Plaza Rose Room—besides even that required several cocktails “to come down to the intellectual level of the women present,” as Amory had once put it to a horrified matron. Amory had lately received several alarming letters from Mr. Barton—the Lake Geneva house was too large to be easily rented; the best rent obtainable at present would serve this year to little more than pay for the taxes and necessary improvements; in fact, the lawyer suggested that the whole property was simply a white elephant on Amory’s hands. Nevertheless, even though it might not yield a cent for the next three years, Amory decided with a vague sentimentality that for the present, at any rate, he would not sell the house.	The rent they could get now would barely cover taxes and needed repairs. The lawyer actually said the house was a financial burden for Amory.

a vague sentimentality	Amory had lately received several alarming letters from Mr. Barton—the Lake Geneva house was too large to be easily rented; the best rent obtainable at present would serve this year to little more than pay for the taxes and necessary improvements; in fact, the lawyer suggested that the whole property was simply a white elephant on Amory’s hands. Nevertheless, even though it might not yield a cent for the next three years, Amory decided with a vague sentimentality that for the present, at any rate, he would not sell the house. This particular day on which he announced his ennui to Tom had been quite typical.	a feeling he couldn't quite explain

day on which he announced his ennui to Tom had been quite typical.	Nevertheless, even though it might not yield a cent for the next three years, Amory decided with a vague sentimentality that for the present, at any rate, he would not sell the house. This particular day on which he announced his ennui to Tom had been quite typical. He had risen at noon, lunched with Mrs. Lawrence, and then ridden abstractedly homeward atop one of his beloved buses.	The day he told Tom he was bored was very typical.

his beloved buses	This particular day on which he announced his ennui to Tom had been quite typical. He had risen at noon, lunched with Mrs. Lawrence, and then ridden abstractedly homeward atop one of his beloved buses. “Why shouldn’t you be bored,” yawned Tom.	his favorite buses

lunched with Mrs. Lawrence, and then ridden abstractedly homeward atop one of his beloved buses.	This particular day on which he announced his ennui to Tom had been quite typical. He had risen at noon, lunched with Mrs. Lawrence, and then ridden abstractedly homeward atop one of his beloved buses. “Why shouldn’t you be bored,” yawned Tom.	He had lunch with Mrs. Lawrence and then rode home absentmindedly on one of his favorite buses.

frame of mind for the young man of your age and condition?”	“Why shouldn’t you be bored,” yawned Tom. “Isn’t that the conventional frame of mind for the young man of your age and condition?” “Yes,” said Amory speculatively, “but I’m more than bored; I am restless.”	state of mind for a young man your age and situation?

more than bored; I am restless.”	“Isn’t that the conventional frame of mind for the young man of your age and condition?” “Yes,” said Amory speculatively, “but I’m more than bored; I am restless.” “Love and war did for you.”	I am more than bored; I am restless.

war itself had any great effect on either you or me—but it certainly ruined the old backgrounds, sort of killed individualism out of our generation.”	“Love and war did for you.” “Well,” Amory considered, “I’m not sure that the war itself had any great effect on either you or me—but it certainly ruined the old backgrounds, sort of killed individualism out of our generation.” Tom looked up in surprise.	The war itself didn't have a big effect on either of us, but it definitely destroyed the old ways of life and kind of eliminated individuality in our generation.

sort of killed individualism	“Love and war did for you.” “Well,” Amory considered, “I’m not sure that the war itself had any great effect on either you or me—but it certainly ruined the old backgrounds, sort of killed individualism out of our generation.” Tom looked up in surprise.	kind of killed individualism

out of the whole world.	“Yes it did,” insisted Amory. “I’m not sure it didn’t kill it out of the whole world. Oh, Lord, what a pleasure it used to be to dream I might be a really great dictator or writer or religious or political leader—and now even a Leonardo da Vinci or Lorenzo de Medici couldn’t be a real old-fashioned bolt in the world.	from the entire world

a really great dictator	“I’m not sure it didn’t kill it out of the whole world. Oh, Lord, what a pleasure it used to be to dream I might be a really great dictator or writer or religious or political leader—and now even a Leonardo da Vinci or Lorenzo de Medici couldn’t be a real old-fashioned bolt in the world. Life is too huge and complex.	a truly great dictator

now even a Leonardo da Vinci	“I’m not sure it didn’t kill it out of the whole world. Oh, Lord, what a pleasure it used to be to dream I might be a really great dictator or writer or religious or political leader—and now even a Leonardo da Vinci or Lorenzo de Medici couldn’t be a real old-fashioned bolt in the world. Life is too huge and complex.	Now even a Leonardo da Vinci

a real old-fashioned bolt	“I’m not sure it didn’t kill it out of the whole world. Oh, Lord, what a pleasure it used to be to dream I might be a really great dictator or writer or religious or political leader—and now even a Leonardo da Vinci or Lorenzo de Medici couldn’t be a real old-fashioned bolt in the world. Life is too huge and complex.	a real important person

agree with you,” Tom interrupted.	Life is too huge and complex. The world is so overgrown that it can’t lift its own fingers, and I was planning to be such an important finger—” “I don’t agree with you,” Tom interrupted. “There never were men placed in such egotistic positions since—oh, since the French Revolution.”	I don’t agree with you.

such egotistic positions	The world is so overgrown that it can’t lift its own fingers, and I was planning to be such an important finger—” “I don’t agree with you,” Tom interrupted. “There never were men placed in such egotistic positions since—oh, since the French Revolution.” Amory disagreed violently.	such selfish positions

since—oh, since the French Revolution.”	The world is so overgrown that it can’t lift its own fingers, and I was planning to be such an important finger—” “I don’t agree with you,” Tom interrupted. “There never were men placed in such egotistic positions since—oh, since the French Revolution.” Amory disagreed violently.	since the French Revolution.

mistaking this period when every nut is an individualist for a period of individualism.	Amory disagreed violently. “You’re mistaking this period when every nut is an individualist for a period of individualism. Wilson has only been powerful when he has represented; he’s had to compromise over and over again.	You're wrongly calling this time, when every eccentric person acts like an individualist, a time of true individualism.

been powerful when he has represented; he’s had to compromise over and over again.	“You’re mistaking this period when every nut is an individualist for a period of individualism. Wilson has only been powerful when he has represented; he’s had to compromise over and over again. Just as soon as Trotsky and Lenin take a definite, consistent stand they’ll become merely two-minute figures like Kerensky.	been powerful when he represented others; he had to compromise repeatedly.

soon as Trotsky and Lenin take a definite, consistent stand they’ll become merely two-minute figures like Kerensky.	Wilson has only been powerful when he has represented; he’s had to compromise over and over again. Just as soon as Trotsky and Lenin take a definite, consistent stand they’ll become merely two-minute figures like Kerensky. Even Foch hasn’t half the significance of Stonewall Jackson.	As soon as Trotsky and Lenin take a firm and consistent position, they'll become insignificant figures like Kerensky.

Even Foch	Just as soon as Trotsky and Lenin take a definite, consistent stand they’ll become merely two-minute figures like Kerensky. Even Foch hasn’t half the significance of Stonewall Jackson. War used to be the most individualistic pursuit of man, and yet the popular heroes of the war had neither authority nor responsibility: Guynemer and Sergeant York.	Even Foch

significance of Stonewall Jackson.	Just as soon as Trotsky and Lenin take a definite, consistent stand they’ll become merely two-minute figures like Kerensky. Even Foch hasn’t half the significance of Stonewall Jackson. War used to be the most individualistic pursuit of man, and yet the popular heroes of the war had neither authority nor responsibility: Guynemer and Sergeant York.	importance of Stonewall Jackson.

pursuit of man, and yet the popular heroes of the war had neither authority nor responsibility: Guynemer and Sergeant York.	Even Foch hasn’t half the significance of Stonewall Jackson. War used to be the most individualistic pursuit of man, and yet the popular heroes of the war had neither authority nor responsibility: Guynemer and Sergeant York. How could a schoolboy make a hero of Pershing?	War used to be something very individual for people, but the famous heroes of the war didn't have any power or duties: Guynemer and Sergeant York.

the most individualistic pursuit	Even Foch hasn’t half the significance of Stonewall Jackson. War used to be the most individualistic pursuit of man, and yet the popular heroes of the war had neither authority nor responsibility: Guynemer and Sergeant York. How could a schoolboy make a hero of Pershing?	the most individual activity

hero of Pershing?	War used to be the most individualistic pursuit of man, and yet the popular heroes of the war had neither authority nor responsibility: Guynemer and Sergeant York. How could a schoolboy make a hero of Pershing? A big man has no time really to do anything but just sit and be big.”	Why would a schoolboy make Pershing a hero?

chapter on The Hero as a Big Man.”	“Yes—in history—not in life. Carlyle would have difficulty getting material for a new chapter on The Hero as a Big Man.” “Go on.	chapter about a hero who is a powerful person.

a good listener	“Go on. I’m a good listener today.” “People try so hard to believe in leaders now, pitifully hard.	I'm a good listener

believe in leaders now, pitifully hard.	I’m a good listener today.” “People try so hard to believe in leaders now, pitifully hard. But we no sooner get a popular reformer or politician or soldier or writer or philosopher—a Roosevelt, a Tolstoy, a Wood, a Shaw, a Nietzsche, than the crosscurrents of criticism wash him away.	People are trying very hard to believe in leaders now.

Shaw, a Nietzsche, than the crosscurrents of criticism wash him away.	“People try so hard to believe in leaders now, pitifully hard. But we no sooner get a popular reformer or politician or soldier or writer or philosopher—a Roosevelt, a Tolstoy, a Wood, a Shaw, a Nietzsche, than the crosscurrents of criticism wash him away. My Lord, no man can stand prominence these days.	Shaw, Nietzsche, and others like them are quickly criticized and dismissed.

a popular reformer	“People try so hard to believe in leaders now, pitifully hard. But we no sooner get a popular reformer or politician or soldier or writer or philosopher—a Roosevelt, a Tolstoy, a Wood, a Shaw, a Nietzsche, than the crosscurrents of criticism wash him away. My Lord, no man can stand prominence these days.	a well-liked reformer

path to obscurity.	My Lord, no man can stand prominence these days. It’s the surest path to obscurity. People get sick of hearing the same name over and over.”	way to be forgotten.

sick of hearing the same name over and over.”	It’s the surest path to obscurity. People get sick of hearing the same name over and over.” “Then you blame it on the press?”	Tired of hearing the same name repeatedly.

’re on The New Democracy, considered the most brilliant weekly in the country, read by the men who do things and all that.	“Absolutely. Look at you; you’re on The New Democracy, considered the most brilliant weekly in the country, read by the men who do things and all that. What’s your business?	You're on The New Democracy, which is known as the smartest weekly magazine in the country, and is read by important people.

man, doctrine, book, or policy that is assigned you to deal with.	What’s your business? Why, to be as clever, as interesting, and as brilliantly cynical as possible about every man, doctrine, book, or policy that is assigned you to deal with. The more strong lights, the more spiritual scandal you can throw on the matter, the more money they pay you, the more the people buy the issue.	the person, idea, book, or rule you're supposed to cover.

the more spiritual scandal	Why, to be as clever, as interesting, and as brilliantly cynical as possible about every man, doctrine, book, or policy that is assigned you to deal with. The more strong lights, the more spiritual scandal you can throw on the matter, the more money they pay you, the more the people buy the issue. You, Tom d’Invilliers, a blighted Shelley, changing, shifting, clever, unscrupulous, represent the critical consciousness of the race—Oh, don’t protest, I know the stuff.	The more criticism of moral or religious issues.

money they pay you, the more the people buy the issue.	Why, to be as clever, as interesting, and as brilliantly cynical as possible about every man, doctrine, book, or policy that is assigned you to deal with. The more strong lights, the more spiritual scandal you can throw on the matter, the more money they pay you, the more the people buy the issue. You, Tom d’Invilliers, a blighted Shelley, changing, shifting, clever, unscrupulous, represent the critical consciousness of the race—Oh, don’t protest, I know the stuff.	The more money they pay you, the more copies of the publication people will buy.

a blighted Shelley	The more strong lights, the more spiritual scandal you can throw on the matter, the more money they pay you, the more the people buy the issue. You, Tom d’Invilliers, a blighted Shelley, changing, shifting, clever, unscrupulous, represent the critical consciousness of the race—Oh, don’t protest, I know the stuff. I used to write book reviews in college; I considered it rare sport to refer to the latest honest, conscientious effort to propound a theory or a remedy as a ‘welcome addition to our light summer reading.’	A ruined Shelley

Tom d’Invilliers	The more strong lights, the more spiritual scandal you can throw on the matter, the more money they pay you, the more the people buy the issue. You, Tom d’Invilliers, a blighted Shelley, changing, shifting, clever, unscrupulous, represent the critical consciousness of the race—Oh, don’t protest, I know the stuff. I used to write book reviews in college; I considered it rare sport to refer to the latest honest, conscientious effort to propound a theory or a remedy as a ‘welcome addition to our light summer reading.’	Tom d'Invilliers

d’Invilliers, a blighted Shelley, changing, shifting, clever, unscrupulous, represent the critical consciousness of the race—Oh, don’t protest, I know the stuff.	The more strong lights, the more spiritual scandal you can throw on the matter, the more money they pay you, the more the people buy the issue. You, Tom d’Invilliers, a blighted Shelley, changing, shifting, clever, unscrupulous, represent the critical consciousness of the race—Oh, don’t protest, I know the stuff. I used to write book reviews in college; I considered it rare sport to refer to the latest honest, conscientious effort to propound a theory or a remedy as a ‘welcome addition to our light summer reading.’	D’Invilliers, a ruined Shelley, changing, flexible, clever, and unethical, represents the critical thinking of the world – Oh, don’t argue, I know how it is.

the latest honest, conscientious effort	You, Tom d’Invilliers, a blighted Shelley, changing, shifting, clever, unscrupulous, represent the critical consciousness of the race—Oh, don’t protest, I know the stuff. I used to write book reviews in college; I considered it rare sport to refer to the latest honest, conscientious effort to propound a theory or a remedy as a ‘welcome addition to our light summer reading.’ Come on now, admit it.”	the most recent honest and careful attempt

write book reviews in college; I considered it rare sport to refer to the latest honest, conscientious effort to propound a theory or a remedy as a ‘welcome addition to our light summer reading.’	You, Tom d’Invilliers, a blighted Shelley, changing, shifting, clever, unscrupulous, represent the critical consciousness of the race—Oh, don’t protest, I know the stuff. I used to write book reviews in college; I considered it rare sport to refer to the latest honest, conscientious effort to propound a theory or a remedy as a ‘welcome addition to our light summer reading.’ Come on now, admit it.”	I wrote book reviews in college, and I thought it was a fun game to call the newest honest and careful attempt to explain an idea or solution a "welcome addition to our light summer reading."

believe in older authors, constituents try to believe in their Congressmen, countries try to believe in their statesmen, but they can’t.	“We want to believe. Young students try to believe in older authors, constituents try to believe in their Congressmen, countries try to believe in their statesmen, but they can’t. Too many voices, too much scattered, illogical, ill-considered criticism.	People try to believe in older authors, people in a district try to believe in their Congressmen, and countries try to believe in their leaders, but they can't.

too much scattered, illogical, ill-considered criticism	Young students try to believe in older authors, constituents try to believe in their Congressmen, countries try to believe in their statesmen, but they can’t. Too many voices, too much scattered, illogical, ill-considered criticism. It’s worse in the case of newspapers.	Too much criticism is all over the place, doesn't make sense, and isn't well thought out.

voices, too much scattered, illogical, ill-considered criticism.	Young students try to believe in older authors, constituents try to believe in their Congressmen, countries try to believe in their statesmen, but they can’t. Too many voices, too much scattered, illogical, ill-considered criticism. It’s worse in the case of newspapers.	There's too much disorganized, nonsensical, and poorly thought-out criticism.

’s worse in the case of newspapers.	Too many voices, too much scattered, illogical, ill-considered criticism. It’s worse in the case of newspapers. Any rich, unprogressive old party with that particularly grasping, acquisitive form of mentality known as financial genius can own a paper that is the intellectual meat and drink of thousands of tired, hurried men, men too involved in the business of modern living to swallow anything but predigested food.	It's even worse with newspapers.

hurried men	It’s worse in the case of newspapers. Any rich, unprogressive old party with that particularly grasping, acquisitive form of mentality known as financial genius can own a paper that is the intellectual meat and drink of thousands of tired, hurried men, men too involved in the business of modern living to swallow anything but predigested food. For two cents the voter buys his politics, prejudices, and philosophy.	Busy men

that particularly grasping, acquisitive form	It’s worse in the case of newspapers. Any rich, unprogressive old party with that particularly grasping, acquisitive form of mentality known as financial genius can own a paper that is the intellectual meat and drink of thousands of tired, hurried men, men too involved in the business of modern living to swallow anything but predigested food. For two cents the voter buys his politics, prejudices, and philosophy.	that especially greedy, money-hungry type

predigested food	It’s worse in the case of newspapers. Any rich, unprogressive old party with that particularly grasping, acquisitive form of mentality known as financial genius can own a paper that is the intellectual meat and drink of thousands of tired, hurried men, men too involved in the business of modern living to swallow anything but predigested food. For two cents the voter buys his politics, prejudices, and philosophy.	easy-to-understand information

Any rich, unprogressive old party	It’s worse in the case of newspapers. Any rich, unprogressive old party with that particularly grasping, acquisitive form of mentality known as financial genius can own a paper that is the intellectual meat and drink of thousands of tired, hurried men, men too involved in the business of modern living to swallow anything but predigested food. For two cents the voter buys his politics, prejudices, and philosophy.	Any wealthy, old-fashioned person

known as financial genius can own a paper that is the intellectual meat and drink of thousands of tired, hurried men, men too involved in the business of modern living to swallow anything but predigested food.	It’s worse in the case of newspapers. Any rich, unprogressive old party with that particularly grasping, acquisitive form of mentality known as financial genius can own a paper that is the intellectual meat and drink of thousands of tired, hurried men, men too involved in the business of modern living to swallow anything but predigested food. For two cents the voter buys his politics, prejudices, and philosophy.	who are considered financial geniuses can own a newspaper that provides the intellectual nourishment for thousands of tired and busy men, who are too caught up in modern life to accept anything but easily understood information.

buys his politics, prejudices, and philosophy.	Any rich, unprogressive old party with that particularly grasping, acquisitive form of mentality known as financial genius can own a paper that is the intellectual meat and drink of thousands of tired, hurried men, men too involved in the business of modern living to swallow anything but predigested food. For two cents the voter buys his politics, prejudices, and philosophy. A year later there is a new political ring or a change in the paper’s ownership, consequence: more confusion, more contradiction, a sudden inrush of new ideas, their tempering, their distillation, the reaction against them—” He paused only to get his breath.	buys his political views, biases, and beliefs.

more contradiction	For two cents the voter buys his politics, prejudices, and philosophy. A year later there is a new political ring or a change in the paper’s ownership, consequence: more confusion, more contradiction, a sudden inrush of new ideas, their tempering, their distillation, the reaction against them—” He paused only to get his breath. “And that is why I have sworn not to put pen to paper until my ideas either clarify or depart entirely; I have quite enough sins on my soul without putting dangerous, shallow epigrams into people’s heads; I might cause a poor, inoffensive capitalist to have a vulgar liaison with a bomb, or get some innocent little Bolshevik tangled up with a machine-gun bullet—” Tom was growing restless under this lampooning of his connection with The New Democracy.	more contradiction

the paper’s ownership	For two cents the voter buys his politics, prejudices, and philosophy. A year later there is a new political ring or a change in the paper’s ownership, consequence: more confusion, more contradiction, a sudden inrush of new ideas, their tempering, their distillation, the reaction against them—” He paused only to get his breath. “And that is why I have sworn not to put pen to paper until my ideas either clarify or depart entirely; I have quite enough sins on my soul without putting dangerous, shallow epigrams into people’s heads; I might cause a poor, inoffensive capitalist to have a vulgar liaison with a bomb, or get some innocent little Bolshevik tangled up with a machine-gun bullet—” Tom was growing restless under this lampooning of his connection with The New Democracy.	the newspaper's owners

confusion, more contradiction, a sudden inrush of new ideas, their tempering, their distillation, the reaction against them—” He paused only to get his breath.	For two cents the voter buys his politics, prejudices, and philosophy. A year later there is a new political ring or a change in the paper’s ownership, consequence: more confusion, more contradiction, a sudden inrush of new ideas, their tempering, their distillation, the reaction against them—” He paused only to get his breath. “And that is why I have sworn not to put pen to paper until my ideas either clarify or depart entirely; I have quite enough sins on my soul without putting dangerous, shallow epigrams into people’s heads; I might cause a poor, inoffensive capitalist to have a vulgar liaison with a bomb, or get some innocent little Bolshevik tangled up with a machine-gun bullet—” Tom was growing restless under this lampooning of his connection with The New Democracy.	More confusion, more contradiction, a sudden arrival of new ideas, their softening, their refinement, and the opposition to them." He paused to catch his breath.

a sudden inrush	For two cents the voter buys his politics, prejudices, and philosophy. A year later there is a new political ring or a change in the paper’s ownership, consequence: more confusion, more contradiction, a sudden inrush of new ideas, their tempering, their distillation, the reaction against them—” He paused only to get his breath. “And that is why I have sworn not to put pen to paper until my ideas either clarify or depart entirely; I have quite enough sins on my soul without putting dangerous, shallow epigrams into people’s heads; I might cause a poor, inoffensive capitalist to have a vulgar liaison with a bomb, or get some innocent little Bolshevik tangled up with a machine-gun bullet—” Tom was growing restless under this lampooning of his connection with The New Democracy.	a sudden rush

a vulgar liaison	A year later there is a new political ring or a change in the paper’s ownership, consequence: more confusion, more contradiction, a sudden inrush of new ideas, their tempering, their distillation, the reaction against them—” He paused only to get his breath. “And that is why I have sworn not to put pen to paper until my ideas either clarify or depart entirely; I have quite enough sins on my soul without putting dangerous, shallow epigrams into people’s heads; I might cause a poor, inoffensive capitalist to have a vulgar liaison with a bomb, or get some innocent little Bolshevik tangled up with a machine-gun bullet—” Tom was growing restless under this lampooning of his connection with The New Democracy. “What’s all this got to do with your being bored?”	an inappropriate relationship

people’s heads	A year later there is a new political ring or a change in the paper’s ownership, consequence: more confusion, more contradiction, a sudden inrush of new ideas, their tempering, their distillation, the reaction against them—” He paused only to get his breath. “And that is why I have sworn not to put pen to paper until my ideas either clarify or depart entirely; I have quite enough sins on my soul without putting dangerous, shallow epigrams into people’s heads; I might cause a poor, inoffensive capitalist to have a vulgar liaison with a bomb, or get some innocent little Bolshevik tangled up with a machine-gun bullet—” Tom was growing restless under this lampooning of his connection with The New Democracy. “What’s all this got to do with your being bored?”	people's minds

dangerous, shallow epigrams	A year later there is a new political ring or a change in the paper’s ownership, consequence: more confusion, more contradiction, a sudden inrush of new ideas, their tempering, their distillation, the reaction against them—” He paused only to get his breath. “And that is why I have sworn not to put pen to paper until my ideas either clarify or depart entirely; I have quite enough sins on my soul without putting dangerous, shallow epigrams into people’s heads; I might cause a poor, inoffensive capitalist to have a vulgar liaison with a bomb, or get some innocent little Bolshevik tangled up with a machine-gun bullet—” Tom was growing restless under this lampooning of his connection with The New Democracy. “What’s all this got to do with your being bored?”	dangerous, superficial clever sayings

a poor, inoffensive capitalist	A year later there is a new political ring or a change in the paper’s ownership, consequence: more confusion, more contradiction, a sudden inrush of new ideas, their tempering, their distillation, the reaction against them—” He paused only to get his breath. “And that is why I have sworn not to put pen to paper until my ideas either clarify or depart entirely; I have quite enough sins on my soul without putting dangerous, shallow epigrams into people’s heads; I might cause a poor, inoffensive capitalist to have a vulgar liaison with a bomb, or get some innocent little Bolshevik tangled up with a machine-gun bullet—” Tom was growing restless under this lampooning of his connection with The New Democracy. “What’s all this got to do with your being bored?”	a harmless, ordinary capitalist

some innocent little Bolshevik	A year later there is a new political ring or a change in the paper’s ownership, consequence: more confusion, more contradiction, a sudden inrush of new ideas, their tempering, their distillation, the reaction against them—” He paused only to get his breath. “And that is why I have sworn not to put pen to paper until my ideas either clarify or depart entirely; I have quite enough sins on my soul without putting dangerous, shallow epigrams into people’s heads; I might cause a poor, inoffensive capitalist to have a vulgar liaison with a bomb, or get some innocent little Bolshevik tangled up with a machine-gun bullet—” Tom was growing restless under this lampooning of his connection with The New Democracy. “What’s all this got to do with your being bored?”	some harmless little Bolshevik

clarify or depart entirely; I have quite enough sins on my soul without putting dangerous, shallow epigrams into people’s heads; I might cause a poor, inoffensive capitalist to have a vulgar liaison with a bomb, or get some innocent little Bolshevik tangled up with a machine-gun bullet—” Tom was growing restless under this lampooning of his connection with The New Democracy.	A year later there is a new political ring or a change in the paper’s ownership, consequence: more confusion, more contradiction, a sudden inrush of new ideas, their tempering, their distillation, the reaction against them—” He paused only to get his breath. “And that is why I have sworn not to put pen to paper until my ideas either clarify or depart entirely; I have quite enough sins on my soul without putting dangerous, shallow epigrams into people’s heads; I might cause a poor, inoffensive capitalist to have a vulgar liaison with a bomb, or get some innocent little Bolshevik tangled up with a machine-gun bullet—” Tom was growing restless under this lampooning of his connection with The New Democracy. “What’s all this got to do with your being bored?”	clarify or disappear completely. I have enough problems without spreading dangerous, superficial clever sayings; I could cause a harmless capitalist to get mixed up with a bomb, or get an innocent Bolshevik killed by a machine gun." Tom was getting annoyed by this mockery of his involvement with The New Democracy.

do with your being bored?”	“And that is why I have sworn not to put pen to paper until my ideas either clarify or depart entirely; I have quite enough sins on my soul without putting dangerous, shallow epigrams into people’s heads; I might cause a poor, inoffensive capitalist to have a vulgar liaison with a bomb, or get some innocent little Bolshevik tangled up with a machine-gun bullet—” Tom was growing restless under this lampooning of his connection with The New Democracy. “What’s all this got to do with your being bored?” Amory considered that it had much to do with it.	do with you being bored?"

much to do with it.	“What’s all this got to do with your being bored?” Amory considered that it had much to do with it. “How’ll I fit in?”	It has a lot to do with it.

an entirely sexless animal	To propagate the race? According to the American novels we are led to believe that the ‘healthy American boy’ from nineteen to twenty-five is an entirely sexless animal. As a matter of fact, the healthier he is the less that’s true.	a completely asexual person

led to believe that the ‘healthy American boy’ from nineteen to twenty-five is an entirely sexless animal.	To propagate the race? According to the American novels we are led to believe that the ‘healthy American boy’ from nineteen to twenty-five is an entirely sexless animal. As a matter of fact, the healthier he is the less that’s true.	We're led to believe the healthy young American man, from ages nineteen to twenty-five, has no interest in sex at all.

matter of fact, the healthier he is the less that’s true.	According to the American novels we are led to believe that the ‘healthy American boy’ from nineteen to twenty-five is an entirely sexless animal. As a matter of fact, the healthier he is the less that’s true. The only alternative to letting it get you is some violent interest.	Actually, the healthier he is, the less that's true.

alternative to letting it get you is some violent interest.	As a matter of fact, the healthier he is the less that’s true. The only alternative to letting it get you is some violent interest. Well, the war is over; I believe too much in the responsibilities of authorship to write just now; and business, well, business speaks for itself.	The only way to avoid being consumed by it is to find something exciting and engaging.

believe too much in the responsibilities of authorship to write just now; and business, well, business speaks for itself.	The only alternative to letting it get you is some violent interest. Well, the war is over; I believe too much in the responsibilities of authorship to write just now; and business, well, business speaks for itself. It has no connection with anything in the world that I’ve ever been interested in, except a slim, utilitarian connection with economics.	I believe in the responsibilities of writing too much to write right now; and business speaks for itself.

anything in the world that I’ve ever been interested in, except a slim, utilitarian connection with economics.	Well, the war is over; I believe too much in the responsibilities of authorship to write just now; and business, well, business speaks for itself. It has no connection with anything in the world that I’ve ever been interested in, except a slim, utilitarian connection with economics. What I’d see of it, lost in a clerkship, for the next and best ten years of my life would have the intellectual content of an industrial movie.”	Anything I've ever cared about, except for a small, practical link to economics.

a slim, utilitarian connection	Well, the war is over; I believe too much in the responsibilities of authorship to write just now; and business, well, business speaks for itself. It has no connection with anything in the world that I’ve ever been interested in, except a slim, utilitarian connection with economics. What I’d see of it, lost in a clerkship, for the next and best ten years of my life would have the intellectual content of an industrial movie.”	a small, practical connection

see of it, lost in a clerkship, for the next and best ten years of my life would have the intellectual content of an industrial movie.”	It has no connection with anything in the world that I’ve ever been interested in, except a slim, utilitarian connection with economics. What I’d see of it, lost in a clerkship, for the next and best ten years of my life would have the intellectual content of an industrial movie.” “Try fiction,” suggested Tom.	What I'd experience, stuck in a clerk job, for the next ten years would be intellectually empty.

doing it instead of living—get thinking maybe life is waiting for me in the Japanese gardens at the Ritz or at Atlantic City or on the lower East Side.	“Try fiction,” suggested Tom. “Trouble is I get distracted when I start to write stories—get afraid I’m doing it instead of living—get thinking maybe life is waiting for me in the Japanese gardens at the Ritz or at Atlantic City or on the lower East Side. “Anyway,” he continued, “I haven’t the vital urge.	Doing it instead of experiencing life—thinking maybe life is happening somewhere else, like at the Ritz gardens, Atlantic City, or the lower East Side.

girl in the wide world that could have held me.”	If I thought there’d be another I’d lose my remaining faith in human nature. Maybe I’ll play—but Rosalind was the only girl in the wide world that could have held me.” “Well,” yawned Tom, “I’ve played confidant a good hour by the clock.	the only girl in the world who could have kept my interest.

have violent views again on something.”	“Well,” yawned Tom, “I’ve played confidant a good hour by the clock. Still, I’m glad to see you’re beginning to have violent views again on something.” “I am,” agreed Amory reluctantly.	getting worked up about something again.

makes me sick at my stomach—” “Happy families try to make people feel that way,” said Tom cynically.	“I am,” agreed Amory reluctantly. “Yet when I see a happy family it makes me sick at my stomach—” “Happy families try to make people feel that way,” said Tom cynically.	makes me nauseous." "Happy families try to make people feel inadequate," Tom said cynically.

days when Amory listened.	There were days when Amory listened. These were when Tom, wreathed in smoke, indulged in the slaughter of American literature.	Days Amory listened.

indulged in the slaughter of American literature.	There were days when Amory listened. These were when Tom, wreathed in smoke, indulged in the slaughter of American literature. Words failed him.	savagely criticized American literature.

look at them—Edna Ferber, Gouverneur Morris, Fanny Hurst, Mary Roberts Rinehart—not producing among ’em one story or novel that will last ten years.	“My God! Look at them, look at them—Edna Ferber, Gouverneur Morris, Fanny Hurst, Mary Roberts Rinehart—not producing among ’em one story or novel that will last ten years. This man Cobb—I don’t think he’s either clever or amusing—and what’s more, I don’t think very many people do, except the editors.	Look at them—Edna Ferber, Gouverneur Morris, Fanny Hurst, Mary Roberts Rinehart—none of them are writing a story or novel that anyone will remember in ten years.

man Cobb—I don’t think he’s either clever or amusing—and what’s more, I don’t think very many people do, except the editors.	Look at them, look at them—Edna Ferber, Gouverneur Morris, Fanny Hurst, Mary Roberts Rinehart—not producing among ’em one story or novel that will last ten years. This man Cobb—I don’t think he’s either clever or amusing—and what’s more, I don’t think very many people do, except the editors. He’s just groggy with advertising.	I don't think that guy Cobb is clever or funny, and most people probably agree, except maybe the editors.

groggy with advertising.	This man Cobb—I don’t think he’s either clever or amusing—and what’s more, I don’t think very many people do, except the editors. He’s just groggy with advertising. And—oh Harold Bell Wright	Drunk on advertising.

oh Zane Grey	And—oh Harold Bell Wright oh Zane Grey—” “They try.” “No, they don’t even try.	oh Zane Grey

Most of them can’t write, I’ll admit.	Some of them can write, but they won’t sit down and do one honest novel. Most of them can’t write, I’ll admit. I believe Rupert Hughes tries to give a real, comprehensive picture of American life, but his style and perspective are barbarous.	I admit most of them can't write.

picture of American life, but his style and perspective are barbarous.	Most of them can’t write, I’ll admit. I believe Rupert Hughes tries to give a real, comprehensive picture of American life, but his style and perspective are barbarous. Ernest Poole and Dorothy Canfield try but they’re hindered by their absolute lack of any sense of humor; but at least they crowd their work instead of spreading it thin.	picture of American life, but his writing style and viewpoint are crude.

lack of any sense of humor; but at least they crowd their work instead of spreading it thin.	I believe Rupert Hughes tries to give a real, comprehensive picture of American life, but his style and perspective are barbarous. Ernest Poole and Dorothy Canfield try but they’re hindered by their absolute lack of any sense of humor; but at least they crowd their work instead of spreading it thin. Every author ought to write every book as if he were going to be beheaded the day he finished it.”	they have no sense of humor, but at least they pack a lot into their work instead of making it superficial.

write every book as if he were going to be beheaded the day he finished it.”	Ernest Poole and Dorothy Canfield try but they’re hindered by their absolute lack of any sense of humor; but at least they crowd their work instead of spreading it thin. Every author ought to write every book as if he were going to be beheaded the day he finished it.” “Is that double entente?” “Don’t slow me up!	write every book like it's the last thing you'll ever do.

that double entente	Every author ought to write every book as if he were going to be beheaded the day he finished it.” “Is that double entente?” “Don’t slow me up! Now there’s a few of ’em that seem to have some cultural background, some intelligence and a good deal of literary felicity but they just simply won’t write honestly; they’d all claim there was no public for good stuff.	Is that a double meaning?

literary felicity	“Is that double entente?” “Don’t slow me up! Now there’s a few of ’em that seem to have some cultural background, some intelligence and a good deal of literary felicity but they just simply won’t write honestly; they’d all claim there was no public for good stuff. Then why the devil is it that Wells, Conrad, Galsworthy, Shaw, Bennett, and the rest depend on America for over half their sales?”	skill in writing

deal of literary felicity but they just simply won’t write honestly; they’d all claim there was no public for good stuff.	“Is that double entente?” “Don’t slow me up! Now there’s a few of ’em that seem to have some cultural background, some intelligence and a good deal of literary felicity but they just simply won’t write honestly; they’d all claim there was no public for good stuff. Then why the devil is it that Wells, Conrad, Galsworthy, Shaw, Bennett, and the rest depend on America for over half their sales?”	a lot of skill with words, but they refuse to write truthfully; they all say there's no audience for quality work.

depend on America for over half their sales?”	Now there’s a few of ’em that seem to have some cultural background, some intelligence and a good deal of literary felicity but they just simply won’t write honestly; they’d all claim there was no public for good stuff. Then why the devil is it that Wells, Conrad, Galsworthy, Shaw, Bennett, and the rest depend on America for over half their sales?” “How does little Tommy like the poets?”	rely on America for more than half of their sales?"

dropped his arms until they swung loosely beside the chair and emitted faint grunts.	Tom was overcome. He dropped his arms until they swung loosely beside the chair and emitted faint grunts. “I’m writing a satire on ’em now, calling it Boston Bards and Hearst Reviewers.”	dropped his arms, letting them hang by the chair, and grunted softly.

writing a satire on ’em now, calling it Boston Bards and Hearst Reviewers.”	He dropped his arms until they swung loosely beside the chair and emitted faint grunts. “I’m writing a satire on ’em now, calling it Boston Bards and Hearst Reviewers.” “Let’s hear it,” said Amory eagerly.	I'm writing a satire about them now, calling it "Boston Bards and Hearst Reviewers."

hear ’em, if they’re funny.”	“That’s very modern. Let’s hear ’em, if they’re funny.” Tom produced a folded paper from his pocket and read aloud, pausing at intervals so that Amory could see that it was free verse: “So Walter Arensberg, Alfred Kreymborg, Carl Sandburg, Louis Untermeyer, Eunice Tietjens, Clara Shanafelt, James Oppenheim, Maxwell Bodenheim, Richard Glaenzer, Scharmel Iris, Conrad Aiken, I place your names here So that you may live If only as names, Sinuous, mauve-colored names, In the Juvenalia Of my collected editions.”	Let's hear them, if they're funny.

place your names here So that you may live If only as names, Sinuous, mauve-colored names, In the Juvenalia Of my collected editions.”	Let’s hear ’em, if they’re funny.” Tom produced a folded paper from his pocket and read aloud, pausing at intervals so that Amory could see that it was free verse: “So Walter Arensberg, Alfred Kreymborg, Carl Sandburg, Louis Untermeyer, Eunice Tietjens, Clara Shanafelt, James Oppenheim, Maxwell Bodenheim, Richard Glaenzer, Scharmel Iris, Conrad Aiken, I place your names here So that you may live If only as names, Sinuous, mauve-colored names, In the Juvenalia Of my collected editions.” Amory roared.	I put your names here so you might live on, even if just as names, winding, purple names, in the early works of my collected books.

mauve-colored names	Let’s hear ’em, if they’re funny.” Tom produced a folded paper from his pocket and read aloud, pausing at intervals so that Amory could see that it was free verse: “So Walter Arensberg, Alfred Kreymborg, Carl Sandburg, Louis Untermeyer, Eunice Tietjens, Clara Shanafelt, James Oppenheim, Maxwell Bodenheim, Richard Glaenzer, Scharmel Iris, Conrad Aiken, I place your names here So that you may live If only as names, Sinuous, mauve-colored names, In the Juvenalia Of my collected editions.” Amory roared.	purple names

“So Walter Arensberg	Let’s hear ’em, if they’re funny.” Tom produced a folded paper from his pocket and read aloud, pausing at intervals so that Amory could see that it was free verse: “So Walter Arensberg, Alfred Kreymborg, Carl Sandburg, Louis Untermeyer, Eunice Tietjens, Clara Shanafelt, James Oppenheim, Maxwell Bodenheim, Richard Glaenzer, Scharmel Iris, Conrad Aiken, I place your names here So that you may live If only as names, Sinuous, mauve-colored names, In the Juvenalia Of my collected editions.” Amory roared.	So Walter Arensberg

the iron pansy	Amory roared. “You win the iron pansy. I’ll buy you a meal on the arrogance of the last two lines.”	the iron pansy

meal on the arrogance of the last two lines.”	“You win the iron pansy. I’ll buy you a meal on the arrogance of the last two lines.” Amory did not entirely agree with Tom’s sweeping damnation of American novelists and poets.	I'll buy you dinner because the last two lines were so presumptuous.

damnation of American novelists and poets.	I’ll buy you a meal on the arrogance of the last two lines.” Amory did not entirely agree with Tom’s sweeping damnation of American novelists and poets. He enjoyed both Vachel Lindsay and Booth Tarkington, and admired the conscientious, if slender, artistry of Edgar Lee Masters.	criticism of American novelists and poets.

American novelists	I’ll buy you a meal on the arrogance of the last two lines.” Amory did not entirely agree with Tom’s sweeping damnation of American novelists and poets. He enjoyed both Vachel Lindsay and Booth Tarkington, and admired the conscientious, if slender, artistry of Edgar Lee Masters.	American novelists

Tom’s sweeping damnation	I’ll buy you a meal on the arrogance of the last two lines.” Amory did not entirely agree with Tom’s sweeping damnation of American novelists and poets. He enjoyed both Vachel Lindsay and Booth Tarkington, and admired the conscientious, if slender, artistry of Edgar Lee Masters.	Tom's complete dismissal

both Vachel Lindsay	Amory did not entirely agree with Tom’s sweeping damnation of American novelists and poets. He enjoyed both Vachel Lindsay and Booth Tarkington, and admired the conscientious, if slender, artistry of Edgar Lee Masters. “What I hate is this idiotic drivel about ‘I am God—I am man—I ride the winds—I look through the smoke—I am the life sense.’ ”	Vachel Lindsay

artistry of Edgar Lee Masters.	Amory did not entirely agree with Tom’s sweeping damnation of American novelists and poets. He enjoyed both Vachel Lindsay and Booth Tarkington, and admired the conscientious, if slender, artistry of Edgar Lee Masters. “What I hate is this idiotic drivel about ‘I am God—I am man—I ride the winds—I look through the smoke—I am the life sense.’ ”	Edgar Lee Masters' skill as an artist.

this idiotic drivel	He enjoyed both Vachel Lindsay and Booth Tarkington, and admired the conscientious, if slender, artistry of Edgar Lee Masters. “What I hate is this idiotic drivel about ‘I am God—I am man—I ride the winds—I look through the smoke—I am the life sense.’ ” “It’s ghastly!”	this stupid nonsense

look through the smoke—I am the life sense.’ ”	He enjoyed both Vachel Lindsay and Booth Tarkington, and admired the conscientious, if slender, artistry of Edgar Lee Masters. “What I hate is this idiotic drivel about ‘I am God—I am man—I ride the winds—I look through the smoke—I am the life sense.’ ” “It’s ghastly!”	I see through everything—I am the meaning of life.

American novelists	“It’s ghastly!” “And I wish American novelists would give up trying to make business romantically interesting. Nobody wants to read about it, unless it’s crooked business.	American novelists

read about it, unless it’s crooked business.	“And I wish American novelists would give up trying to make business romantically interesting. Nobody wants to read about it, unless it’s crooked business. If it was an entertaining subject they’d buy the life of James J. Hill and not one of these long office tragedies that harp along on the significance of smoke—” “And gloom,” said Tom.	read about it unless it involves dishonest dealings.

crooked business	“And I wish American novelists would give up trying to make business romantically interesting. Nobody wants to read about it, unless it’s crooked business. If it was an entertaining subject they’d buy the life of James J. Hill and not one of these long office tragedies that harp along on the significance of smoke—” “And gloom,” said Tom.	illegal or dishonest business

life of James J. Hill and not one of these long office tragedies that harp along on the significance of smoke—” “And gloom,” said Tom.	Nobody wants to read about it, unless it’s crooked business. If it was an entertaining subject they’d buy the life of James J. Hill and not one of these long office tragedies that harp along on the significance of smoke—” “And gloom,” said Tom. “That’s another favorite, though I’ll admit the Russians have the monopoly.	James J. Hill's biography, not one of those boring office stories that drone on about the importance of smoke—" "And gloom," said Tom.

’s another favorite, though I’ll admit the Russians have the monopoly.	If it was an entertaining subject they’d buy the life of James J. Hill and not one of these long office tragedies that harp along on the significance of smoke—” “And gloom,” said Tom. “That’s another favorite, though I’ll admit the Russians have the monopoly. Our specialty is stories about little girls who break their spines and get adopted by grouchy old men because they smile so much.	It's another favorite, although I admit the Russians do it best.

girls who break their spines and get adopted by grouchy old men because they smile so much.	“That’s another favorite, though I’ll admit the Russians have the monopoly. Our specialty is stories about little girls who break their spines and get adopted by grouchy old men because they smile so much. You’d think we were a race of cheerful cripples and that the common end of the Russian peasant was suicide—” “Six o’clock,” said Amory, glancing at his wristwatch.	girls who get spinal injuries and are adopted by grumpy old men because they're so cheerful.

grouchy old men	“That’s another favorite, though I’ll admit the Russians have the monopoly. Our specialty is stories about little girls who break their spines and get adopted by grouchy old men because they smile so much. You’d think we were a race of cheerful cripples and that the common end of the Russian peasant was suicide—” “Six o’clock,” said Amory, glancing at his wristwatch.	grumpy old men

glancing at his wristwatch.	Our specialty is stories about little girls who break their spines and get adopted by grouchy old men because they smile so much. You’d think we were a race of cheerful cripples and that the common end of the Russian peasant was suicide—” “Six o’clock,” said Amory, glancing at his wristwatch. “I’ll buy you a grea’ big dinner on the strength of the Juvenalia of your collected editions.”	looking at his watch.

cheerful cripples	Our specialty is stories about little girls who break their spines and get adopted by grouchy old men because they smile so much. You’d think we were a race of cheerful cripples and that the common end of the Russian peasant was suicide—” “Six o’clock,” said Amory, glancing at his wristwatch. “I’ll buy you a grea’ big dinner on the strength of the Juvenalia of your collected editions.”	happy disabled people

” “Six o’clock	Our specialty is stories about little girls who break their spines and get adopted by grouchy old men because they smile so much. You’d think we were a race of cheerful cripples and that the common end of the Russian peasant was suicide—” “Six o’clock,” said Amory, glancing at his wristwatch. “I’ll buy you a grea’ big dinner on the strength of the Juvenalia of your collected editions.”	Six o'clock.

the Russian peasant	Our specialty is stories about little girls who break their spines and get adopted by grouchy old men because they smile so much. You’d think we were a race of cheerful cripples and that the common end of the Russian peasant was suicide—” “Six o’clock,” said Amory, glancing at his wristwatch. “I’ll buy you a grea’ big dinner on the strength of the Juvenalia of your collected editions.”	Russian farmers

strength of the Juvenalia of your collected editions.”	You’d think we were a race of cheerful cripples and that the common end of the Russian peasant was suicide—” “Six o’clock,” said Amory, glancing at his wristwatch. “I’ll buy you a grea’ big dinner on the strength of the Juvenalia of your collected editions.”	because of the childish writings in your collected works.

Amory in another surge of unrest realized that it was just five months since he and Rosalind had met.	July sweltered out with a last hot week, and Amory in another surge of unrest realized that it was just five months since he and Rosalind had met. Yet it was already hard for him to visualize the heart-whole boy who had stepped off the transport, passionately desiring the adventure of life.	Amory, feeling restless again, realized it had only been five months since he'd met Rosalind.

was already hard for him to visualize the heart-whole boy who had stepped off the transport, passionately desiring the adventure of life.	July sweltered out with a last hot week, and Amory in another surge of unrest realized that it was just five months since he and Rosalind had met. Yet it was already hard for him to visualize the heart-whole boy who had stepped off the transport, passionately desiring the adventure of life. One night while the heat, overpowering and enervating, poured into the windows of his room he struggled for several hours in a vague effort to immortalize the poignancy of that time.	He could barely remember being that innocent, eager boy who had just arrived.

a vague effort	Yet it was already hard for him to visualize the heart-whole boy who had stepped off the transport, passionately desiring the adventure of life. One night while the heat, overpowering and enervating, poured into the windows of his room he struggled for several hours in a vague effort to immortalize the poignancy of that time. The February streets, wind-washed by night, blow full of strange half-intermittent damps, bearing on wasted walks in shining sight wet snow plashed into gleams under the lamps, like golden oil from some divine machine, in an hour of thaw and stars.	an unclear attempt

poignancy of that time.	Yet it was already hard for him to visualize the heart-whole boy who had stepped off the transport, passionately desiring the adventure of life. One night while the heat, overpowering and enervating, poured into the windows of his room he struggled for several hours in a vague effort to immortalize the poignancy of that time. The February streets, wind-washed by night, blow full of strange half-intermittent damps, bearing on wasted walks in shining sight wet snow plashed into gleams under the lamps, like golden oil from some divine machine, in an hour of thaw and stars.	the intense emotion of that period.

oil from some divine machine, in an hour of thaw and stars.	One night while the heat, overpowering and enervating, poured into the windows of his room he struggled for several hours in a vague effort to immortalize the poignancy of that time. The February streets, wind-washed by night, blow full of strange half-intermittent damps, bearing on wasted walks in shining sight wet snow plashed into gleams under the lamps, like golden oil from some divine machine, in an hour of thaw and stars. Strange damps—full of the eyes of many men, crowded with life borne in upon a lull.	oil from a perfect machine, during a starry, thawing night.

strange half-intermittent damps	One night while the heat, overpowering and enervating, poured into the windows of his room he struggled for several hours in a vague effort to immortalize the poignancy of that time. The February streets, wind-washed by night, blow full of strange half-intermittent damps, bearing on wasted walks in shining sight wet snow plashed into gleams under the lamps, like golden oil from some divine machine, in an hour of thaw and stars. Strange damps—full of the eyes of many men, crowded with life borne in upon a lull.	odd, sometimes-appearing wetness

borne in upon a lull.	The February streets, wind-washed by night, blow full of strange half-intermittent damps, bearing on wasted walks in shining sight wet snow plashed into gleams under the lamps, like golden oil from some divine machine, in an hour of thaw and stars. Strange damps—full of the eyes of many men, crowded with life borne in upon a lull. Oh, I was young, for I could turn again to you, most finite and most beautiful, and taste the stuff of half-remembered dreams, sweet and new on your mouth.	carried in during a quiet moment.

Strange damps	The February streets, wind-washed by night, blow full of strange half-intermittent damps, bearing on wasted walks in shining sight wet snow plashed into gleams under the lamps, like golden oil from some divine machine, in an hour of thaw and stars. Strange damps—full of the eyes of many men, crowded with life borne in upon a lull. Oh, I was young, for I could turn again to you, most finite and most beautiful, and taste the stuff of half-remembered dreams, sweet and new on your mouth.	Strange, wet air.

taste the stuff of half-remembered dreams, sweet and new on your mouth.	Strange damps—full of the eyes of many men, crowded with life borne in upon a lull. Oh, I was young, for I could turn again to you, most finite and most beautiful, and taste the stuff of half-remembered dreams, sweet and new on your mouth. There was a tanging in the midnight air—silence was dead and sound not yet awoken—Life cracked like ice!—one brilliant note and there, radiant and pale, you stood.	taste the sweet, fresh memories on your mouth.

ice!—one brilliant note	Oh, I was young, for I could turn again to you, most finite and most beautiful, and taste the stuff of half-remembered dreams, sweet and new on your mouth. There was a tanging in the midnight air—silence was dead and sound not yet awoken—Life cracked like ice!—one brilliant note and there, radiant and pale, you stood. and spring had broken.	Ice! One clear, bright sound.

cracked like ice!—one brilliant note and there, radiant and pale, you stood.	Oh, I was young, for I could turn again to you, most finite and most beautiful, and taste the stuff of half-remembered dreams, sweet and new on your mouth. There was a tanging in the midnight air—silence was dead and sound not yet awoken—Life cracked like ice!—one brilliant note and there, radiant and pale, you stood. and spring had broken.	It broke like ice! One bright note, and there you were, glowing and pale.

short upon the roofs and the changeling city swooned.)	and spring had broken. (The icicles were short upon the roofs and the changeling city swooned.) Our thoughts were frosty mist along the eaves; our two ghosts kissed, high on the long, mazed wires—eerie half-laughter echoes here and leaves only a fatuous sigh for young desires; regret has followed after things she loved, leaving the great husk.	The icicles were short on the roofs, and the changeable city was fading.

the changeling city	and spring had broken. (The icicles were short upon the roofs and the changeling city swooned.) Our thoughts were frosty mist along the eaves; our two ghosts kissed, high on the long, mazed wires—eerie half-laughter echoes here and leaves only a fatuous sigh for young desires; regret has followed after things she loved, leaving the great husk.	the city that has transformed

things she loved, leaving the great husk.	(The icicles were short upon the roofs and the changeling city swooned.) Our thoughts were frosty mist along the eaves; our two ghosts kissed, high on the long, mazed wires—eerie half-laughter echoes here and leaves only a fatuous sigh for young desires; regret has followed after things she loved, leaving the great husk.	what she loved, leaving only emptiness.

eerie half-laughter	(The icicles were short upon the roofs and the changeling city swooned.) Our thoughts were frosty mist along the eaves; our two ghosts kissed, high on the long, mazed wires—eerie half-laughter echoes here and leaves only a fatuous sigh for young desires; regret has followed after things she loved, leaving the great husk.	strange, unsettling laughter

the great husk	(The icicles were short upon the roofs and the changeling city swooned.) Our thoughts were frosty mist along the eaves; our two ghosts kissed, high on the long, mazed wires—eerie half-laughter echoes here and leaves only a fatuous sigh for young desires; regret has followed after things she loved, leaving the great husk.	the empty shell

only a fatuous sigh	(The icicles were short upon the roofs and the changeling city swooned.) Our thoughts were frosty mist along the eaves; our two ghosts kissed, high on the long, mazed wires—eerie half-laughter echoes here and leaves only a fatuous sigh for young desires; regret has followed after things she loved, leaving the great husk.	just a silly sigh

frosty mist	(The icicles were short upon the roofs and the changeling city swooned.) Our thoughts were frosty mist along the eaves; our two ghosts kissed, high on the long, mazed wires—eerie half-laughter echoes here and leaves only a fatuous sigh for young desires; regret has followed after things she loved, leaving the great husk.	icy fog

the long, mazed wires	(The icicles were short upon the roofs and the changeling city swooned.) Our thoughts were frosty mist along the eaves; our two ghosts kissed, high on the long, mazed wires—eerie half-laughter echoes here and leaves only a fatuous sigh for young desires; regret has followed after things she loved, leaving the great husk.	the long, tangled wires

Darcy, who had evidently just stumbled on his address: My dear Boy: Your last letter was quite enough to make me worry about you.	In mid-August came a letter from Monsignor Darcy, who had evidently just stumbled on his address: My dear Boy: Your last letter was quite enough to make me worry about you. It was not a bit like yourself.	Darcy, who had apparently just found his address, wrote: My dear Boy, Your last letter really worried me.

feeling of romance that you had before the war.	It was not a bit like yourself. Reading between the lines I should imagine that your engagement to this girl is making you rather unhappy, and I see you have lost all the feeling of romance that you had before the war. You make a great mistake if you think you can be romantic without religion.	romantic feelings you had before the war.

the mystical element	You make a great mistake if you think you can be romantic without religion. Sometimes I think that with both of us the secret of success, when we find it, is the mystical element in us: something flows into us that enlarges our personalities, and when it ebbs out our personalities shrink; I should call your last two letters rather shrivelled. Beware of losing yourself in the personality of another being, man or woman.	the spiritual side

element in us: something flows into us that enlarges our personalities, and when it ebbs out our personalities shrink; I should call your last two letters rather shrivelled.	You make a great mistake if you think you can be romantic without religion. Sometimes I think that with both of us the secret of success, when we find it, is the mystical element in us: something flows into us that enlarges our personalities, and when it ebbs out our personalities shrink; I should call your last two letters rather shrivelled. Beware of losing yourself in the personality of another being, man or woman.	something within us makes us feel bigger and better, and when it disappears, we feel smaller and worse; your last two letters seemed a bit lifeless to me.

Beware of losing yourself in the personality of another being, man or woman.	Sometimes I think that with both of us the secret of success, when we find it, is the mystical element in us: something flows into us that enlarges our personalities, and when it ebbs out our personalities shrink; I should call your last two letters rather shrivelled. Beware of losing yourself in the personality of another being, man or woman. His Eminence Cardinal O’Neill and the Bishop of Boston are staying with me at present, so it is hard for me to get a moment to write, but I wish you would come up here later if only for a weekend.	Be careful not to lose yourself in someone else's personality, whether it's a man or a woman.

get a moment to write, but I wish you would come up here later if only for a weekend.	Beware of losing yourself in the personality of another being, man or woman. His Eminence Cardinal O’Neill and the Bishop of Boston are staying with me at present, so it is hard for me to get a moment to write, but I wish you would come up here later if only for a weekend. I go to Washington this week.	find time to write, but I hope you can visit sometime, even if it's just for a weekend.

be surprised to see the red hat of a cardinal descend upon my unworthy head within the next eight months.	What I shall do in the future is hanging in the balance. Absolutely between ourselves I should not be surprised to see the red hat of a cardinal descend upon my unworthy head within the next eight months. In any event, I should like to have a house in New York or Washington where you could drop in for weekends.	become a cardinal in the next eight months.

my unworthy head	What I shall do in the future is hanging in the balance. Absolutely between ourselves I should not be surprised to see the red hat of a cardinal descend upon my unworthy head within the next eight months. In any event, I should like to have a house in New York or Washington where you could drop in for weekends.	me

like to have a house in New York or Washington where you could drop in for weekends.	Absolutely between ourselves I should not be surprised to see the red hat of a cardinal descend upon my unworthy head within the next eight months. In any event, I should like to have a house in New York or Washington where you could drop in for weekends. Amory, I’m very glad we’re both alive; this war could easily have been the end of a brilliant family.	I'd like to have a house in New York or Washington where you could visit for weekends.

Amory, I’m very glad we’re both alive; this war could easily have been the end of a brilliant family.	In any event, I should like to have a house in New York or Washington where you could drop in for weekends. Amory, I’m very glad we’re both alive; this war could easily have been the end of a brilliant family. But in regard to matrimony, you are now at the most dangerous period of your life.	Amory, I'm very glad we're both alive; this war could have easily wiped out our family.

marry in haste and repent at leisure, but I think you won’t.	But in regard to matrimony, you are now at the most dangerous period of your life. You might marry in haste and repent at leisure, but I think you won’t. From what you write me about the present calamitous state of your finances, what you want is naturally impossible.	You might rush into marriage and regret it later, but I don't think you will.

the present calamitous state	You might marry in haste and repent at leisure, but I think you won’t. From what you write me about the present calamitous state of your finances, what you want is naturally impossible. However, if I judge you by the means I usually choose, I should say that there will be something of an emotional crisis within the next year.	your current disastrous financial situation

state of your finances, what you want is naturally impossible.	You might marry in haste and repent at leisure, but I think you won’t. From what you write me about the present calamitous state of your finances, what you want is naturally impossible. However, if I judge you by the means I usually choose, I should say that there will be something of an emotional crisis within the next year.	your financial situation, what you want is impossible.

say that there will be something of an emotional crisis within the next year.	From what you write me about the present calamitous state of your finances, what you want is naturally impossible. However, if I judge you by the means I usually choose, I should say that there will be something of an emotional crisis within the next year. Do write me.	there will be an emotional crisis in the next year.

greatest affection	I feel annoyingly out of date on you. With greatest affection, Thayer Darcy. Within a week after the receipt of this letter their little household fell precipitously to pieces.	With love.

fell precipitously to pieces.	With greatest affection, Thayer Darcy. Within a week after the receipt of this letter their little household fell precipitously to pieces. The immediate cause was the serious and probably chronic illness of Tom’s mother.	completely fell apart.

Tom’s mother	Within a week after the receipt of this letter their little household fell precipitously to pieces. The immediate cause was the serious and probably chronic illness of Tom’s mother. So they stored the furniture, gave instructions to sublet and shook hands gloomily in the Pennsylvania Station.	Tom's mom

the serious and probably chronic illness	Within a week after the receipt of this letter their little household fell precipitously to pieces. The immediate cause was the serious and probably chronic illness of Tom’s mother. So they stored the furniture, gave instructions to sublet and shook hands gloomily in the Pennsylvania Station.	the serious and likely long-term illness

illness of Tom’s mother.	Within a week after the receipt of this letter their little household fell precipitously to pieces. The immediate cause was the serious and probably chronic illness of Tom’s mother. So they stored the furniture, gave instructions to sublet and shook hands gloomily in the Pennsylvania Station.	Tom's mother got sick.

instructions to sublet and shook hands gloomily in the Pennsylvania Station.	The immediate cause was the serious and probably chronic illness of Tom’s mother. So they stored the furniture, gave instructions to sublet and shook hands gloomily in the Pennsylvania Station. Amory and Tom seemed always to be saying goodbye.	told someone to rent out their place and sadly shook hands at Pennsylvania Station.

set off southward, intending to join Monsignor in Washington.	Amory and Tom seemed always to be saying goodbye. Feeling very much alone, Amory yielded to an impulse and set off southward, intending to join Monsignor in Washington. They missed connections by two hours, and, deciding to spend a few days with an ancient, remembered uncle, Amory journeyed up through the luxuriant fields of Maryland into Ramilly County.	left, heading south to meet Monsignor in Washington.

the luxuriant fields	Feeling very much alone, Amory yielded to an impulse and set off southward, intending to join Monsignor in Washington. They missed connections by two hours, and, deciding to spend a few days with an ancient, remembered uncle, Amory journeyed up through the luxuriant fields of Maryland into Ramilly County. But instead of two days his stay lasted from mid-August nearly through September, for in Maryland he met Eleanor.	the lush fields

fields of Maryland into Ramilly County.	Feeling very much alone, Amory yielded to an impulse and set off southward, intending to join Monsignor in Washington. They missed connections by two hours, and, deciding to spend a few days with an ancient, remembered uncle, Amory journeyed up through the luxuriant fields of Maryland into Ramilly County. But instead of two days his stay lasted from mid-August nearly through September, for in Maryland he met Eleanor.	Maryland countryside to Ramilly County.

for in Maryland he met Eleanor.	They missed connections by two hours, and, deciding to spend a few days with an ancient, remembered uncle, Amory journeyed up through the luxuriant fields of Maryland into Ramilly County. But instead of two days his stay lasted from mid-August nearly through September, for in Maryland he met Eleanor.	because he met Eleanor in Maryland.

thought of Eleanor he seemed still to hear the wind sobbing around him and sending little chills into the places beside his heart.	For years afterward when Amory thought of Eleanor he seemed still to hear the wind sobbing around him and sending little chills into the places beside his heart. The night when they rode up the slope and watched the cold moon float through the clouds, he lost a further part of him that nothing could restore; and when he lost it he lost also the power of regretting it.	remembering Eleanor, he could still almost hear the wind crying around him, making him feel a cold ache deep inside.

little chills	For years afterward when Amory thought of Eleanor he seemed still to hear the wind sobbing around him and sending little chills into the places beside his heart. The night when they rode up the slope and watched the cold moon float through the clouds, he lost a further part of him that nothing could restore; and when he lost it he lost also the power of regretting it.	slight shivers

lost also the power of regretting it.	For years afterward when Amory thought of Eleanor he seemed still to hear the wind sobbing around him and sending little chills into the places beside his heart. The night when they rode up the slope and watched the cold moon float through the clouds, he lost a further part of him that nothing could restore; and when he lost it he lost also the power of regretting it. Eleanor was, say, the last time that evil crept close to Amory under the mask of beauty, the last weird mystery that held him with wild fascination and pounded his soul to flakes.	he also lost the ability to regret it.

mystery that held him with wild fascination and pounded his soul to flakes.	The night when they rode up the slope and watched the cold moon float through the clouds, he lost a further part of him that nothing could restore; and when he lost it he lost also the power of regretting it. Eleanor was, say, the last time that evil crept close to Amory under the mask of beauty, the last weird mystery that held him with wild fascination and pounded his soul to flakes. With her his imagination ran riot and that is why they rode to the highest hill and watched an evil moon ride high, for they knew then that they could see the devil in each other.	mystery that captivated him and shattered his soul.

wild fascination	The night when they rode up the slope and watched the cold moon float through the clouds, he lost a further part of him that nothing could restore; and when he lost it he lost also the power of regretting it. Eleanor was, say, the last time that evil crept close to Amory under the mask of beauty, the last weird mystery that held him with wild fascination and pounded his soul to flakes. With her his imagination ran riot and that is why they rode to the highest hill and watched an evil moon ride high, for they knew then that they could see the devil in each other.	intense attraction

rode to the highest hill and watched an evil moon ride high, for they knew then that they could see the devil in each other.	Eleanor was, say, the last time that evil crept close to Amory under the mask of beauty, the last weird mystery that held him with wild fascination and pounded his soul to flakes. With her his imagination ran riot and that is why they rode to the highest hill and watched an evil moon ride high, for they knew then that they could see the devil in each other. But Eleanor—did Amory dream her?	went to the highest hill and watched an evil moon, because they knew they could see the evil in each other.

the infinite sadness	Afterward their ghosts played, yet both of them hoped from their souls never to meet. Was it the infinite sadness of her eyes that drew him or the mirror of himself that he found in the gorgeous clarity of her mind? She will have no other adventure like Amory, and if she reads this she will say: “And Amory will have no other adventure like me.”	endless sorrow

mirror of himself that he found in the gorgeous clarity of her mind?	Afterward their ghosts played, yet both of them hoped from their souls never to meet. Was it the infinite sadness of her eyes that drew him or the mirror of himself that he found in the gorgeous clarity of her mind? She will have no other adventure like Amory, and if she reads this she will say: “And Amory will have no other adventure like me.”	the reflection of himself he saw in her brilliant mind?

say: “And Amory will have no other adventure like me.”	Was it the infinite sadness of her eyes that drew him or the mirror of himself that he found in the gorgeous clarity of her mind? She will have no other adventure like Amory, and if she reads this she will say: “And Amory will have no other adventure like me.” Nor will she sigh, any more than he would sigh.	say, "Amory will never have another adventure like me."

more than he would sigh.	She will have no other adventure like Amory, and if she reads this she will say: “And Amory will have no other adventure like me.” Nor will she sigh, any more than he would sigh. Eleanor tried to put it on paper once: “The fading things we only know We’ll have forgotten.	more than he would sigh.

The fading things	Nor will she sigh, any more than he would sigh. Eleanor tried to put it on paper once: “The fading things we only know We’ll have forgotten. Put away.	Things we forget

things we only know We’ll have forgotten.	Nor will she sigh, any more than he would sigh. Eleanor tried to put it on paper once: “The fading things we only know We’ll have forgotten. Put away.	things we know we'll forget.

Desires that melted with the snow, And dreams begotten This today:	Put away. Desires that melted with the snow, And dreams begotten This today: The sudden dawns we laughed to greet, That all could see, that none could share, Will be but dawns.	Wishes gone like melting snow, and dreams born just today:

dawns we laughed to greet, That all could see, that none could share, Will be but dawns.	Desires that melted with the snow, And dreams begotten This today: The sudden dawns we laughed to greet, That all could see, that none could share, Will be but dawns. and if we meet We shall not care.	The dawns we laughed at together, that everyone could see but no one else understood, will just be mornings.

silence, When we’ve met, Will give old ghosts a waste to roam, Or stir the surface of the sea.	not one tear will rise for this. A little while hence No regret Will stir for a remembered kiss— Not even silence, When we’ve met, Will give old ghosts a waste to roam, Or stir the surface of the sea. If gray shapes drift beneath the foam We shall not see.”	Even silence between us won't let old memories haunt us or disturb our peace.

drift beneath the foam We shall not see.”	A little while hence No regret Will stir for a remembered kiss— Not even silence, When we’ve met, Will give old ghosts a waste to roam, Or stir the surface of the sea. If gray shapes drift beneath the foam We shall not see.” They quarrelled dangerously because Amory maintained that sea and see couldn’t possibly be used as a rhyme.	float under the waves, we won't notice."

maintained that sea and see couldn’t possibly be used as a rhyme.	If gray shapes drift beneath the foam We shall not see.” They quarrelled dangerously because Amory maintained that sea and see couldn’t possibly be used as a rhyme. And then Eleanor had part of another verse that she couldn’t find a beginning for: “But wisdom passes.	argued that "sea" and "see" didn't rhyme.

verse that she couldn’t find a beginning for: “But wisdom passes.	They quarrelled dangerously because Amory maintained that sea and see couldn’t possibly be used as a rhyme. And then Eleanor had part of another verse that she couldn’t find a beginning for: “But wisdom passes. still the years Will feed us wisdom.	verse she couldn't find a beginning for: "But wisdom passes.

Back to the old—For all our tears We shall not know.”	still the years Will feed us wisdom. Age will go Back to the old—For all our tears We shall not know.” Eleanor hated Maryland passionately.	We'll return to the past—despite our sadness, we won't understand.

belonged to the oldest of the old families of Ramilly County and lived in a big, gloomy house with her grandfather.	Eleanor hated Maryland passionately. She belonged to the oldest of the old families of Ramilly County and lived in a big, gloomy house with her grandfather. She had been born and brought up in France.	came from one of the oldest families in Ramilly County and lived with her grandfather in a large, depressing house.

a big, gloomy house	Eleanor hated Maryland passionately. She belonged to the oldest of the old families of Ramilly County and lived in a big, gloomy house with her grandfather. She had been born and brought up in France.	a large, depressing house

smiling complacency	Amory was bored, as he usually was in the country. He used to go for far walks by himself—and wander along reciting “Ulalume” to the cornfields, and congratulating Poe for drinking himself to death in that atmosphere of smiling complacency. One afternoon he had strolled for several miles along a road that was new to him, and then through a wood on bad advice from a colored woman.	smug satisfaction

reciting “Ulalume” to the cornfields, and congratulating Poe for drinking himself to death in that atmosphere of smiling complacency.	Amory was bored, as he usually was in the country. He used to go for far walks by himself—and wander along reciting “Ulalume” to the cornfields, and congratulating Poe for drinking himself to death in that atmosphere of smiling complacency. One afternoon he had strolled for several miles along a road that was new to him, and then through a wood on bad advice from a colored woman.	reading "Ulalume" aloud to the cornfields, and sarcastically praising Poe for drinking himself to death in such a self-satisfied place.

strolled for several miles along a road that was new to him, and then through a wood on bad advice from a colored woman.	He used to go for far walks by himself—and wander along reciting “Ulalume” to the cornfields, and congratulating Poe for drinking himself to death in that atmosphere of smiling complacency. One afternoon he had strolled for several miles along a road that was new to him, and then through a wood on bad advice from a colored woman. losing himself entirely.	walked for miles on an unfamiliar road, then went into a forest because a Black woman gave him poor directions.

black as pitch and the rain began to splatter down through the trees, become suddenly furtive and ghostly.	losing himself entirely. A passing storm decided to break out, and to his great impatience the sky grew black as pitch and the rain began to splatter down through the trees, become suddenly furtive and ghostly. Thunder rolled with menacing crashes up the valley and scattered through the woods in intermittent batteries.	and the rain started falling hard through the trees, which suddenly looked secretive and like ghosts.

his great impatience	losing himself entirely. A passing storm decided to break out, and to his great impatience the sky grew black as pitch and the rain began to splatter down through the trees, become suddenly furtive and ghostly. Thunder rolled with menacing crashes up the valley and scattered through the woods in intermittent batteries.	his annoyance

scattered through the woods in intermittent batteries.	A passing storm decided to break out, and to his great impatience the sky grew black as pitch and the rain began to splatter down through the trees, become suddenly furtive and ghostly. Thunder rolled with menacing crashes up the valley and scattered through the woods in intermittent batteries. He stumbled blindly on, hunting for a way out, and finally, through webs of twisted branches, caught sight of a rift in the trees where the unbroken lightning showed open country.	echoed sporadically in the woods.

intermittent batteries	A passing storm decided to break out, and to his great impatience the sky grew black as pitch and the rain began to splatter down through the trees, become suddenly furtive and ghostly. Thunder rolled with menacing crashes up the valley and scattered through the woods in intermittent batteries. He stumbled blindly on, hunting for a way out, and finally, through webs of twisted branches, caught sight of a rift in the trees where the unbroken lightning showed open country.	sporadic bursts

menacing crashes	A passing storm decided to break out, and to his great impatience the sky grew black as pitch and the rain began to splatter down through the trees, become suddenly furtive and ghostly. Thunder rolled with menacing crashes up the valley and scattered through the woods in intermittent batteries. He stumbled blindly on, hunting for a way out, and finally, through webs of twisted branches, caught sight of a rift in the trees where the unbroken lightning showed open country.	threatening loud noises

hunting for a way out, and finally, through webs of twisted branches, caught sight of a rift in the trees where the unbroken lightning showed open country.	Thunder rolled with menacing crashes up the valley and scattered through the woods in intermittent batteries. He stumbled blindly on, hunting for a way out, and finally, through webs of twisted branches, caught sight of a rift in the trees where the unbroken lightning showed open country. He rushed to the edge of the woods and then hesitated whether or not to cross the fields and try to reach the shelter of the little house marked by a light far down the valley.	looking for an escape, and eventually, through tangled branches, saw a gap in the trees where the constant lightning revealed open land.

the unbroken lightning	Thunder rolled with menacing crashes up the valley and scattered through the woods in intermittent batteries. He stumbled blindly on, hunting for a way out, and finally, through webs of twisted branches, caught sight of a rift in the trees where the unbroken lightning showed open country. He rushed to the edge of the woods and then hesitated whether or not to cross the fields and try to reach the shelter of the little house marked by a light far down the valley.	continuous lightning

edge of the woods and then hesitated whether or not to cross the fields and try to reach the shelter of the little house marked by a light far down the valley.	He stumbled blindly on, hunting for a way out, and finally, through webs of twisted branches, caught sight of a rift in the trees where the unbroken lightning showed open country. He rushed to the edge of the woods and then hesitated whether or not to cross the fields and try to reach the shelter of the little house marked by a light far down the valley. It was only half past five, but he could see scarcely ten steps before him, except when the lightning made everything vivid and grotesque for great sweeps around.	edge of the woods and then hesitated about crossing the fields to reach the little house with a light in the valley.

vivid and grotesque for great sweeps around.	He rushed to the edge of the woods and then hesitated whether or not to cross the fields and try to reach the shelter of the little house marked by a light far down the valley. It was only half past five, but he could see scarcely ten steps before him, except when the lightning made everything vivid and grotesque for great sweeps around. Suddenly a strange sound fell on his ears.	bright and bizarre all around.

great sweeps	He rushed to the edge of the woods and then hesitated whether or not to cross the fields and try to reach the shelter of the little house marked by a light far down the valley. It was only half past five, but he could see scarcely ten steps before him, except when the lightning made everything vivid and grotesque for great sweeps around. Suddenly a strange sound fell on his ears.	wide flashes

scarcely ten steps	He rushed to the edge of the woods and then hesitated whether or not to cross the fields and try to reach the shelter of the little house marked by a light far down the valley. It was only half past five, but he could see scarcely ten steps before him, except when the lightning made everything vivid and grotesque for great sweeps around. Suddenly a strange sound fell on his ears.	hardly ten steps

a low, husky voice	Suddenly a strange sound fell on his ears. It was a song, in a low, husky voice, a girl’s voice, and whoever was singing was very close to him. A year before he might have laughed, or trembled; but in his restless mood he only stood and listened while the words sank into his consciousness: “Les sanglots longs Des violons De l’automne Blessent mon cœur D’une langueur Monotone.”	a quiet, raspy voice

was a song, in a low, husky voice, a girl’s voice, and whoever was singing was very close to him.	Suddenly a strange sound fell on his ears. It was a song, in a low, husky voice, a girl’s voice, and whoever was singing was very close to him. A year before he might have laughed, or trembled; but in his restless mood he only stood and listened while the words sank into his consciousness: “Les sanglots longs Des violons De l’automne Blessent mon cœur D’une langueur Monotone.”	It was a song sung in a low, raspy voice, a girl's voice, and the singer was very near.

a girl’s voice	Suddenly a strange sound fell on his ears. It was a song, in a low, husky voice, a girl’s voice, and whoever was singing was very close to him. A year before he might have laughed, or trembled; but in his restless mood he only stood and listened while the words sank into his consciousness: “Les sanglots longs Des violons De l’automne Blessent mon cœur D’une langueur Monotone.”	a girl's voice

D’une langueur Monotone	It was a song, in a low, husky voice, a girl’s voice, and whoever was singing was very close to him. A year before he might have laughed, or trembled; but in his restless mood he only stood and listened while the words sank into his consciousness: “Les sanglots longs Des violons De l’automne Blessent mon cœur D’une langueur Monotone.” The lightning split the sky, but the song went on without a quaver.	With a monotonous languor.

cœur D’une langueur Monotone.”	It was a song, in a low, husky voice, a girl’s voice, and whoever was singing was very close to him. A year before he might have laughed, or trembled; but in his restless mood he only stood and listened while the words sank into his consciousness: “Les sanglots longs Des violons De l’automne Blessent mon cœur D’une langueur Monotone.” The lightning split the sky, but the song went on without a quaver.	heart with a monotonous languor.”

his restless mood	It was a song, in a low, husky voice, a girl’s voice, and whoever was singing was very close to him. A year before he might have laughed, or trembled; but in his restless mood he only stood and listened while the words sank into his consciousness: “Les sanglots longs Des violons De l’automne Blessent mon cœur D’une langueur Monotone.” The lightning split the sky, but the song went on without a quaver.	his uneasy state of mind

Des violons	It was a song, in a low, husky voice, a girl’s voice, and whoever was singing was very close to him. A year before he might have laughed, or trembled; but in his restless mood he only stood and listened while the words sank into his consciousness: “Les sanglots longs Des violons De l’automne Blessent mon cœur D’une langueur Monotone.” The lightning split the sky, but the song went on without a quaver.	Of the violins

went on without a quaver.	A year before he might have laughed, or trembled; but in his restless mood he only stood and listened while the words sank into his consciousness: “Les sanglots longs Des violons De l’automne Blessent mon cœur D’une langueur Monotone.” The lightning split the sky, but the song went on without a quaver. The girl was evidently in the field and the voice seemed to come vaguely from a haystack about twenty feet in front of him.	continued without wavering.

come vaguely from a haystack about twenty feet in front of him.	The lightning split the sky, but the song went on without a quaver. The girl was evidently in the field and the voice seemed to come vaguely from a haystack about twenty feet in front of him. Then it ceased: ceased and began again in a weird chant that soared and hung and fell and blended with the rain: “Tout suffocant Et blême quand Sonne l’heure Je me souviens Des jours anciens Et je pleure.”	seemed to be coming from a haystack about twenty feet ahead.

a weird chant	The girl was evidently in the field and the voice seemed to come vaguely from a haystack about twenty feet in front of him. Then it ceased: ceased and began again in a weird chant that soared and hung and fell and blended with the rain: “Tout suffocant Et blême quand Sonne l’heure Je me souviens Des jours anciens Et je pleure.” “Who the devil is there in Ramilly County,” muttered Amory aloud, “who would deliver Verlaine in an extemporaneous tune to a soaking haystack?”	a strange song

Tout suffocant Et blême	The girl was evidently in the field and the voice seemed to come vaguely from a haystack about twenty feet in front of him. Then it ceased: ceased and began again in a weird chant that soared and hung and fell and blended with the rain: “Tout suffocant Et blême quand Sonne l’heure Je me souviens Des jours anciens Et je pleure.” “Who the devil is there in Ramilly County,” muttered Amory aloud, “who would deliver Verlaine in an extemporaneous tune to a soaking haystack?”	Completely breathless and pale

began again in a weird chant that soared and hung and fell and blended with the rain: “Tout suffocant Et blême quand Sonne l’heure Je me souviens Des jours anciens Et je pleure.”	The girl was evidently in the field and the voice seemed to come vaguely from a haystack about twenty feet in front of him. Then it ceased: ceased and began again in a weird chant that soared and hung and fell and blended with the rain: “Tout suffocant Et blême quand Sonne l’heure Je me souviens Des jours anciens Et je pleure.” “Who the devil is there in Ramilly County,” muttered Amory aloud, “who would deliver Verlaine in an extemporaneous tune to a soaking haystack?”	started again with a strange song that rose, lingered, dropped, and mixed with the rain: "Suffocating And pale when Sounds the hour I remember Olden days And I weep."

Des jours anciens	The girl was evidently in the field and the voice seemed to come vaguely from a haystack about twenty feet in front of him. Then it ceased: ceased and began again in a weird chant that soared and hung and fell and blended with the rain: “Tout suffocant Et blême quand Sonne l’heure Je me souviens Des jours anciens Et je pleure.” “Who the devil is there in Ramilly County,” muttered Amory aloud, “who would deliver Verlaine in an extemporaneous tune to a soaking haystack?”	Olden days

an extemporaneous tune	Then it ceased: ceased and began again in a weird chant that soared and hung and fell and blended with the rain: “Tout suffocant Et blême quand Sonne l’heure Je me souviens Des jours anciens Et je pleure.” “Who the devil is there in Ramilly County,” muttered Amory aloud, “who would deliver Verlaine in an extemporaneous tune to a soaking haystack?” “Somebody’s there!” cried the voice unalarmed.	a made-up tune

a soaking haystack	Then it ceased: ceased and began again in a weird chant that soared and hung and fell and blended with the rain: “Tout suffocant Et blême quand Sonne l’heure Je me souviens Des jours anciens Et je pleure.” “Who the devil is there in Ramilly County,” muttered Amory aloud, “who would deliver Verlaine in an extemporaneous tune to a soaking haystack?” “Somebody’s there!” cried the voice unalarmed.	a wet haystack

deliver Verlaine in an extemporaneous tune to a soaking haystack?”	Then it ceased: ceased and began again in a weird chant that soared and hung and fell and blended with the rain: “Tout suffocant Et blême quand Sonne l’heure Je me souviens Des jours anciens Et je pleure.” “Who the devil is there in Ramilly County,” muttered Amory aloud, “who would deliver Verlaine in an extemporaneous tune to a soaking haystack?” “Somebody’s there!” cried the voice unalarmed.	sing Verlaine's poetry off-the-cuff to a wet haystack?

noise of the rain and the wind.	“I’m Don Juan!” Amory shouted on impulse, raising his voice above the noise of the rain and the wind. A delighted shriek came from the haystack.	sound of the rain and wind.

A delighted shriek	Amory shouted on impulse, raising his voice above the noise of the rain and the wind. A delighted shriek came from the haystack. “I know who you are—you’re the blond boy that likes ‘Ulalume’—I recognize your voice.”	A happy shriek

came from the haystack.	Amory shouted on impulse, raising his voice above the noise of the rain and the wind. A delighted shriek came from the haystack. “I know who you are—you’re the blond boy that likes ‘Ulalume’—I recognize your voice.”	came from the haystack.

boy that likes ‘Ulalume’—I recognize your voice.”	A delighted shriek came from the haystack. “I know who you are—you’re the blond boy that likes ‘Ulalume’—I recognize your voice.” “How do I get up?”	boy who likes 'Ulalume'—I recognize your voice."

foot of the haystack, whither he had arrived, dripping wet.	“How do I get up?” he cried from the foot of the haystack, whither he had arrived, dripping wet. A head appeared over the edge—it was so dark that Amory could just make out a patch of damp hair and two eyes that gleamed like a cat’s.	bottom of the haystack, where he had ended up, soaking wet.

damp hair	he cried from the foot of the haystack, whither he had arrived, dripping wet. A head appeared over the edge—it was so dark that Amory could just make out a patch of damp hair and two eyes that gleamed like a cat’s. “Run back!”	wet hair

appeared over the edge—it was so dark that Amory could just make out a patch of damp hair and two eyes that gleamed like a cat’s.	he cried from the foot of the haystack, whither he had arrived, dripping wet. A head appeared over the edge—it was so dark that Amory could just make out a patch of damp hair and two eyes that gleamed like a cat’s. “Run back!”	popped up over the edge—it was so dark Amory could barely see a bit of wet hair and two eyes that shone like a cat's.

catch your hand—no, not there—on the other side.”	“Run back!” came the voice, “and jump and I’ll catch your hand—no, not there—on the other side.” He followed directions and as he sprawled up the side, knee-deep in hay, a small, white hand reached out, gripped his, and helped him onto the top.	Grab your hand—no, not that side—the other side.

helped him onto the top.	came the voice, “and jump and I’ll catch your hand—no, not there—on the other side.” He followed directions and as he sprawled up the side, knee-deep in hay, a small, white hand reached out, gripped his, and helped him onto the top. “Here you are, Juan,” cried she of the damp hair.	helped him get to the top.

she of the damp hair.	He followed directions and as he sprawled up the side, knee-deep in hay, a small, white hand reached out, gripped his, and helped him onto the top. “Here you are, Juan,” cried she of the damp hair. “Do you mind if I drop the Don?”	the girl with the damp hair

the damp hair	He followed directions and as he sprawled up the side, knee-deep in hay, a small, white hand reached out, gripped his, and helped him onto the top. “Here you are, Juan,” cried she of the damp hair. “Do you mind if I drop the Don?”	the wet hair

is dangerous without seeing my face.”	he exclaimed. “And you’re holding my hand, which is dangerous without seeing my face.” He dropped it quickly.	is dangerous without seeing my face.

looked eagerly at her who stood beside him on the soggy haystack, ten feet above the ground.	He dropped it quickly. As if in answer to his prayers came a flash of lightning and he looked eagerly at her who stood beside him on the soggy haystack, ten feet above the ground. But she had covered her face and he saw nothing but a slender figure, dark, damp, bobbed hair, and the small white hands with the thumbs that bent back like his.	looked at her eagerly as she stood next to him on the wet haystack, ten feet off the ground.

the soggy haystack	He dropped it quickly. As if in answer to his prayers came a flash of lightning and he looked eagerly at her who stood beside him on the soggy haystack, ten feet above the ground. But she had covered her face and he saw nothing but a slender figure, dark, damp, bobbed hair, and the small white hands with the thumbs that bent back like his.	the wet haystack

a slender figure	As if in answer to his prayers came a flash of lightning and he looked eagerly at her who stood beside him on the soggy haystack, ten feet above the ground. But she had covered her face and he saw nothing but a slender figure, dark, damp, bobbed hair, and the small white hands with the thumbs that bent back like his. “Sit down,” she suggested politely, as the dark closed in on them.	a thin person

half of the raincoat, which I was using as a waterproof tent until you so rudely interrupted me.”	“Sit down,” she suggested politely, as the dark closed in on them. “If you’ll sit opposite me in this hollow you can have half of the raincoat, which I was using as a waterproof tent until you so rudely interrupted me.” “I was asked,” Amory said joyfully; “you asked me—you know you did.”	half the raincoat. I was using it as a tent to keep dry before you so rudely interrupted me.

reddish hair	“I was asked,” Amory said joyfully; “you asked me—you know you did.” “Don Juan always manages that,” she said, laughing, “but I shan’t call you that any more, because you’ve got reddish hair. Instead you can recite ‘Ulalume’ and I’ll be Psyche, your soul.”	reddish hair

got reddish hair.	“I was asked,” Amory said joyfully; “you asked me—you know you did.” “Don Juan always manages that,” she said, laughing, “but I shan’t call you that any more, because you’ve got reddish hair. Instead you can recite ‘Ulalume’ and I’ll be Psyche, your soul.”	have red hair.

Psyche, your soul.”	“Don Juan always manages that,” she said, laughing, “but I shan’t call you that any more, because you’ve got reddish hair. Instead you can recite ‘Ulalume’ and I’ll be Psyche, your soul.” Amory flushed, happily invisible under the curtain of wind and rain.	Psyche, your soul.

curtain of wind and rain.	Instead you can recite ‘Ulalume’ and I’ll be Psyche, your soul.” Amory flushed, happily invisible under the curtain of wind and rain. They were sitting opposite each other in a slight hollow in the hay with the raincoat spread over most of them, and the rain doing for the rest.	wall of wind and rain.

most of them, and the rain doing for the rest.	Amory flushed, happily invisible under the curtain of wind and rain. They were sitting opposite each other in a slight hollow in the hay with the raincoat spread over most of them, and the rain doing for the rest. Amory was trying desperately to see Psyche, but the lightning refused to flash again, and he waited impatiently.	most of them, and the rain was taking care of the rest.

wasn’t beautiful—supposing she was forty and pedantic—heavens!	Good Lord! supposing she wasn’t beautiful—supposing she was forty and pedantic—heavens! Suppose, only suppose, she was mad.	wasn't beautiful—if she was forty, boring and bookish—good heavens!

sent a girl to amuse him just as it sent Benvenuto Cellini men to murder, and he was wondering if she was mad, just because she exactly filled his mood.	But he knew the last was unworthy. Here had Providence sent a girl to amuse him just as it sent Benvenuto Cellini men to murder, and he was wondering if she was mad, just because she exactly filled his mood. “I’m not,” she said.	sent him a girl to entertain him like Providence sent Benvenuto Cellini men to kill, and he wondered if she was crazy, simply because she perfectly matched his current state of mind.

Benvenuto Cellini men	But he knew the last was unworthy. Here had Providence sent a girl to amuse him just as it sent Benvenuto Cellini men to murder, and he was wondering if she was mad, just because she exactly filled his mood. “I’m not,” she said.	men to murder

long as they knew each other Eleanor and Amory could be “on a subject” and stop talking with the definite thought of it in their heads, yet ten minutes later speak aloud and find that their minds had followed the same channels and led them each to a parallel idea, an idea that others would have found absolutely unconnected with the first.	I didn’t think you were mad when I first saw you, so it isn’t fair that you should think so of me.” “How on earth—” As long as they knew each other Eleanor and Amory could be “on a subject” and stop talking with the definite thought of it in their heads, yet ten minutes later speak aloud and find that their minds had followed the same channels and led them each to a parallel idea, an idea that others would have found absolutely unconnected with the first. “Tell me,” he demanded, leaning forward eagerly, “how do you know about ‘Ulalume’—how did you know the color of my hair?	As long as Eleanor and Amory knew each other, they could be discussing something, stop talking, and still have the same thought in their heads. Then, ten minutes later, they'd start talking again and realize their minds had followed the same path, leading them to a similar idea that others wouldn't have seen as related to what they were initially discussing.

each other Eleanor	I didn’t think you were mad when I first saw you, so it isn’t fair that you should think so of me.” “How on earth—” As long as they knew each other Eleanor and Amory could be “on a subject” and stop talking with the definite thought of it in their heads, yet ten minutes later speak aloud and find that their minds had followed the same channels and led them each to a parallel idea, an idea that others would have found absolutely unconnected with the first. “Tell me,” he demanded, leaning forward eagerly, “how do you know about ‘Ulalume’—how did you know the color of my hair?	each other, Eleanor

the definite thought	I didn’t think you were mad when I first saw you, so it isn’t fair that you should think so of me.” “How on earth—” As long as they knew each other Eleanor and Amory could be “on a subject” and stop talking with the definite thought of it in their heads, yet ten minutes later speak aloud and find that their minds had followed the same channels and led them each to a parallel idea, an idea that others would have found absolutely unconnected with the first. “Tell me,” he demanded, leaning forward eagerly, “how do you know about ‘Ulalume’—how did you know the color of my hair?	a specific thought

know about ‘Ulalume’—how did you know the color of my hair?	“How on earth—” As long as they knew each other Eleanor and Amory could be “on a subject” and stop talking with the definite thought of it in their heads, yet ten minutes later speak aloud and find that their minds had followed the same channels and led them each to a parallel idea, an idea that others would have found absolutely unconnected with the first. “Tell me,” he demanded, leaning forward eagerly, “how do you know about ‘Ulalume’—how did you know the color of my hair? What’s your name?	How do you know about 'Ulalume'? How did you know my hair color?

overreaching light	Tell me all at once!” Suddenly the lightning flashed in with a leap of overreaching light and he saw Eleanor, and looked for the first time into those eyes of hers. Oh, she was magnificent—pale skin, the color of marble in starlight, slender brows, and eyes that glittered green as emeralds in the blinding glare.	light that reached far

looked for the first time into those eyes of hers.	Tell me all at once!” Suddenly the lightning flashed in with a leap of overreaching light and he saw Eleanor, and looked for the first time into those eyes of hers. Oh, she was magnificent—pale skin, the color of marble in starlight, slender brows, and eyes that glittered green as emeralds in the blinding glare.	saw her eyes for the first time.

the blinding glare	Suddenly the lightning flashed in with a leap of overreaching light and he saw Eleanor, and looked for the first time into those eyes of hers. Oh, she was magnificent—pale skin, the color of marble in starlight, slender brows, and eyes that glittered green as emeralds in the blinding glare. She was a witch, of perhaps nineteen, he judged, alert and dreamy and with the telltale white line over her upper lip that was a weakness and a delight.	the bright flash

slender brows	Suddenly the lightning flashed in with a leap of overreaching light and he saw Eleanor, and looked for the first time into those eyes of hers. Oh, she was magnificent—pale skin, the color of marble in starlight, slender brows, and eyes that glittered green as emeralds in the blinding glare. She was a witch, of perhaps nineteen, he judged, alert and dreamy and with the telltale white line over her upper lip that was a weakness and a delight.	thin eyebrows

color of marble in starlight, slender brows, and eyes that glittered green as emeralds in the blinding glare.	Suddenly the lightning flashed in with a leap of overreaching light and he saw Eleanor, and looked for the first time into those eyes of hers. Oh, she was magnificent—pale skin, the color of marble in starlight, slender brows, and eyes that glittered green as emeralds in the blinding glare. She was a witch, of perhaps nineteen, he judged, alert and dreamy and with the telltale white line over her upper lip that was a weakness and a delight.	skin like marble in starlight, thin eyebrows, and eyes that shone green like emeralds in the bright light.

witch, of perhaps nineteen, he judged, alert and dreamy and with the telltale white line over her upper lip that was a weakness and a delight.	Oh, she was magnificent—pale skin, the color of marble in starlight, slender brows, and eyes that glittered green as emeralds in the blinding glare. She was a witch, of perhaps nineteen, he judged, alert and dreamy and with the telltale white line over her upper lip that was a weakness and a delight. He sank back with a gasp against the wall of hay.	A witch, maybe nineteen years old, he thought. She seemed sharp and lost in thought, and had a faint white line above her lip that he found both vulnerable and attractive.

the telltale white line	Oh, she was magnificent—pale skin, the color of marble in starlight, slender brows, and eyes that glittered green as emeralds in the blinding glare. She was a witch, of perhaps nineteen, he judged, alert and dreamy and with the telltale white line over her upper lip that was a weakness and a delight. He sank back with a gasp against the wall of hay.	a faint white line

gasp against the wall of hay.	She was a witch, of perhaps nineteen, he judged, alert and dreamy and with the telltale white line over her upper lip that was a weakness and a delight. He sank back with a gasp against the wall of hay. “Now you’ve seen me,” she said calmly, “and I suppose you’re about to say that my green eyes are burning into your brain.”	gasp against the wall of hay.

them all—besides my name isn’t Madeline, it’s Eleanor.”	“Answer my question, Madeline.” “Don’t remember them all—besides my name isn’t Madeline, it’s Eleanor.” “I might have guessed it.	all of them—anyway, my name isn't Madeline, it's Eleanor.”

look like Eleanor—you have that Eleanor look.	“I might have guessed it. You look like Eleanor—you have that Eleanor look. You know what I mean.”	You look like Eleanor. You have her look.

fellow lunatic	There was a silence as they listened to the rain. “It’s going down my neck, fellow lunatic,” she offered finally. “Answer my questions.”	friend

neck, fellow lunatic,” she offered finally.	There was a silence as they listened to the rain. “It’s going down my neck, fellow lunatic,” she offered finally. “Answer my questions.”	neck, you crazy person,” she finally said.

number on watch-case, 3077 W; nose, delicate aquiline; temperament, uncanny—” “And me,” Amory interrupted, “where did you see me?”	“Answer my questions.” “Well—name of Savage, Eleanor; live in big old house mile down road; nearest living relation to be notified, grandfather—Ramilly Savage; height, five feet four inches; number on watch-case, 3077 W; nose, delicate aquiline; temperament, uncanny—” “And me,” Amory interrupted, “where did you see me?” “Oh, you’re one of those men,” she answered haughtily, “must lug old self into conversation.	watch-case number, 3077 W; nose, thin and slightly curved; personality, strange—” “And me,” Amory interrupted, “where did you see me?”

3077 W	“Answer my questions.” “Well—name of Savage, Eleanor; live in big old house mile down road; nearest living relation to be notified, grandfather—Ramilly Savage; height, five feet four inches; number on watch-case, 3077 W; nose, delicate aquiline; temperament, uncanny—” “And me,” Amory interrupted, “where did you see me?” “Oh, you’re one of those men,” she answered haughtily, “must lug old self into conversation.	3077 W

Ramilly Savage	“Answer my questions.” “Well—name of Savage, Eleanor; live in big old house mile down road; nearest living relation to be notified, grandfather—Ramilly Savage; height, five feet four inches; number on watch-case, 3077 W; nose, delicate aquiline; temperament, uncanny—” “And me,” Amory interrupted, “where did you see me?” “Oh, you’re one of those men,” she answered haughtily, “must lug old self into conversation.	Ramilly Savage

one of those men,” she answered haughtily, “must lug old self into conversation.	“Well—name of Savage, Eleanor; live in big old house mile down road; nearest living relation to be notified, grandfather—Ramilly Savage; height, five feet four inches; number on watch-case, 3077 W; nose, delicate aquiline; temperament, uncanny—” “And me,” Amory interrupted, “where did you see me?” “Oh, you’re one of those men,” she answered haughtily, “must lug old self into conversation. Well, my boy, I was behind a hedge sunning myself one day last week, and along comes a man saying in a pleasant, conceited way of talking: “ ‘And now when the night was senescent’ (says he) ‘And the star dials pointed to morn At the end of the path a liquescent’ (says he) ‘And nebulous lustre was born.’	one of those guys," she answered snobbishly, "who always have to bring themselves into the conversation.

end of the path a liquescent’ (says he) ‘And nebulous lustre was born.’	“Oh, you’re one of those men,” she answered haughtily, “must lug old self into conversation. Well, my boy, I was behind a hedge sunning myself one day last week, and along comes a man saying in a pleasant, conceited way of talking: “ ‘And now when the night was senescent’ (says he) ‘And the star dials pointed to morn At the end of the path a liquescent’ (says he) ‘And nebulous lustre was born.’ “So I poked my eyes up over the hedge, but you had started to run, for some unknown reason, and so I saw but the back of your beautiful head.	at the end of the path a shimmering and cloudy light appeared.

a pleasant, conceited way	“Oh, you’re one of those men,” she answered haughtily, “must lug old self into conversation. Well, my boy, I was behind a hedge sunning myself one day last week, and along comes a man saying in a pleasant, conceited way of talking: “ ‘And now when the night was senescent’ (says he) ‘And the star dials pointed to morn At the end of the path a liquescent’ (says he) ‘And nebulous lustre was born.’ “So I poked my eyes up over the hedge, but you had started to run, for some unknown reason, and so I saw but the back of your beautiful head.	A nice, but arrogant, manner.

nebulous lustre	“Oh, you’re one of those men,” she answered haughtily, “must lug old self into conversation. Well, my boy, I was behind a hedge sunning myself one day last week, and along comes a man saying in a pleasant, conceited way of talking: “ ‘And now when the night was senescent’ (says he) ‘And the star dials pointed to morn At the end of the path a liquescent’ (says he) ‘And nebulous lustre was born.’ “So I poked my eyes up over the hedge, but you had started to run, for some unknown reason, and so I saw but the back of your beautiful head.	hazy light

poked my eyes up over the hedge, but you had started to run, for some unknown reason, and so I saw but the back of your beautiful head.	Well, my boy, I was behind a hedge sunning myself one day last week, and along comes a man saying in a pleasant, conceited way of talking: “ ‘And now when the night was senescent’ (says he) ‘And the star dials pointed to morn At the end of the path a liquescent’ (says he) ‘And nebulous lustre was born.’ “So I poked my eyes up over the hedge, but you had started to run, for some unknown reason, and so I saw but the back of your beautiful head. ‘Oh!’ says I, ‘there’s a man for whom many of us might sigh,’ and I continued in my best Irish—” “All right,” Amory interrupted.	I peeked over the hedge, but you had started running for some reason, so I only saw the back of your head.

man for whom many of us might sigh,’ and I continued in my best Irish—” “All right,” Amory interrupted.	“So I poked my eyes up over the hedge, but you had started to run, for some unknown reason, and so I saw but the back of your beautiful head. ‘Oh!’ says I, ‘there’s a man for whom many of us might sigh,’ and I continued in my best Irish—” “All right,” Amory interrupted. “Now go back to yourself.”	a man many of us would desire,' and I kept going in my best Irish accent—" "All right," Amory interrupted.

those I read into men on such nights as these.	“Well, I will. I’m one of those people who go through the world giving other people thrills, but getting few myself except those I read into men on such nights as these. I have the social courage to go on the stage, but not the energy; I haven’t the patience to write books; and I never met a man I’d marry.	the excitement I imagine in men on nights like this.

other people thrills	“Well, I will. I’m one of those people who go through the world giving other people thrills, but getting few myself except those I read into men on such nights as these. I have the social courage to go on the stage, but not the energy; I haven’t the patience to write books; and I never met a man I’d marry.	giving other people thrills

man I’d marry.	I’m one of those people who go through the world giving other people thrills, but getting few myself except those I read into men on such nights as these. I have the social courage to go on the stage, but not the energy; I haven’t the patience to write books; and I never met a man I’d marry. However, I’m only eighteen.”	a man I would marry.

its ghostly surge	However, I’m only eighteen.” The storm was dying down softly and only the wind kept up its ghostly surge and made the stack lean and gravely settle from side to side. Amory was in a trance.	its eerie rush

feel like a character in a play, the appropriate feeling in an unconventional situation—instead, he had a sense of coming home.	He had never met a girl like this before—she would never seem quite the same again. He didn’t at all feel like a character in a play, the appropriate feeling in an unconventional situation—instead, he had a sense of coming home. “I have just made a great decision,” said Eleanor after another pause, “and that is why I’m here, to answer another of your questions.	feel like he was acting in a scene, which you might expect in such a strange moment—instead, he felt like he belonged.

an unconventional situation	He had never met a girl like this before—she would never seem quite the same again. He didn’t at all feel like a character in a play, the appropriate feeling in an unconventional situation—instead, he had a sense of coming home. “I have just made a great decision,” said Eleanor after another pause, “and that is why I’m here, to answer another of your questions.	an unusual situation

believe in immortality.”	“I have just made a great decision,” said Eleanor after another pause, “and that is why I’m here, to answer another of your questions. I have just decided that I don’t believe in immortality.” “Really!	believe in immortality.

a stale, sickly depression	how banal!” “Frightfully so,” she answered, “but depressing with a stale, sickly depression, nevertheless. I came out here to get wet—like a wet hen; wet hens always have great clarity of mind,” she concluded.	a boring, depressing feeling

depressing with a stale, sickly depression, nevertheless.	how banal!” “Frightfully so,” she answered, “but depressing with a stale, sickly depression, nevertheless. I came out here to get wet—like a wet hen; wet hens always have great clarity of mind,” she concluded.	Still depressing, but in a tired, unhealthy way.

get wet—like a wet hen; wet hens always have great clarity of mind,” she concluded.	“Frightfully so,” she answered, “but depressing with a stale, sickly depression, nevertheless. I came out here to get wet—like a wet hen; wet hens always have great clarity of mind,” she concluded. “Go on,” Amory said politely.	Get soaked—like a wet hen; wet hens always think clearly.

wet hens	“Frightfully so,” she answered, “but depressing with a stale, sickly depression, nevertheless. I came out here to get wet—like a wet hen; wet hens always have great clarity of mind,” she concluded. “Go on,” Amory said politely.	Wet chickens

a wet hen	“Frightfully so,” she answered, “but depressing with a stale, sickly depression, nevertheless. I came out here to get wet—like a wet hen; wet hens always have great clarity of mind,” she concluded. “Go on,” Amory said politely.	soaked to the bone

my slicker and rubber boots	“Go on,” Amory said politely. “Well—I’m not afraid of the dark, so I put on my slicker and rubber boots and came out. You see I was always afraid, before, to say I didn’t believe in God—because the lightning might strike me—but here I am and it hasn’t, of course, but the main point is that this time I wasn’t any more afraid of it than I had been when I was a Christian Scientist, like I was last year.	my raincoat and rubber boots

afraid of the dark, so I put on my slicker and rubber boots and came out.	“Go on,” Amory said politely. “Well—I’m not afraid of the dark, so I put on my slicker and rubber boots and came out. You see I was always afraid, before, to say I didn’t believe in God—because the lightning might strike me—but here I am and it hasn’t, of course, but the main point is that this time I wasn’t any more afraid of it than I had been when I was a Christian Scientist, like I was last year.	afraid of the dark, so I put on my raincoat and boots and went outside.

am and it hasn’t, of course, but the main point is that this time I wasn’t any more afraid of it than I had been when I was a Christian Scientist, like I was last year.	“Well—I’m not afraid of the dark, so I put on my slicker and rubber boots and came out. You see I was always afraid, before, to say I didn’t believe in God—because the lightning might strike me—but here I am and it hasn’t, of course, but the main point is that this time I wasn’t any more afraid of it than I had been when I was a Christian Scientist, like I was last year. So now I know I’m a materialist	and it hasn't struck me, of course. The main thing is, I wasn't any more afraid of it than when I was a Christian Scientist last year.

“Why, you little wretch	and I was fraternizing with the hay when you came out and stood by the woods, scared to death.” “Why, you little wretch—” cried Amory indignantly. “Scared of what?”	You little brat!

Savage, materiologist—no jumping, no starting, come early—” “But I have to have a soul,” he objected.	Conscience—kill it like me! Eleanor Savage, materiologist—no jumping, no starting, come early—” “But I have to have a soul,” he objected. “I can’t be rational—and I won’t be molecular.”	Savage, the expert on matter—no panicking, no freaking out, be on time—” “But I need to have a soul,” he protested.

leaned toward him, her burning eyes never leaving his own and whispered with a sort of romantic finality: “I thought so, Juan, I feared so—you’re sentimental.	“I can’t be rational—and I won’t be molecular.” She leaned toward him, her burning eyes never leaving his own and whispered with a sort of romantic finality: “I thought so, Juan, I feared so—you’re sentimental. You’re not like me.	leaned toward him, staring intently, and whispered dramatically, "I knew it, Juan, I was afraid of this—you're sentimental."

romantic finality	“I can’t be rational—and I won’t be molecular.” She leaned toward him, her burning eyes never leaving his own and whispered with a sort of romantic finality: “I thought so, Juan, I feared so—you’re sentimental. You’re not like me.	like a final, dramatic declaration of love

’re not like me.	She leaned toward him, her burning eyes never leaving his own and whispered with a sort of romantic finality: “I thought so, Juan, I feared so—you’re sentimental. You’re not like me. I’m a romantic little materialist.”	You're not like me.

a romantic little materialist	You’re not like me. I’m a romantic little materialist.” “I’m not sentimental—I’m as romantic as you are.	Someone who appreciates beautiful things but also likes money and possessions.

the sentimental person	“I’m not sentimental—I’m as romantic as you are. The idea, you know, is that the sentimental person thinks things will last—the romantic person has a desperate confidence that they won’t.” (This was an ancient distinction of Amory’s.)	someone who thinks things will last

distinction of Amory’s.)	The idea, you know, is that the sentimental person thinks things will last—the romantic person has a desperate confidence that they won’t.” (This was an ancient distinction of Amory’s.) “Epigrams.	Amory always said that.

get off the haystack and walk to the crossroads.”	I’m going home,” she said sadly. “Let’s get off the haystack and walk to the crossroads.” They slowly descended from their perch.	Get off the haystack and walk to the crossroads.

descended from their perch.	“Let’s get off the haystack and walk to the crossroads.” They slowly descended from their perch. She would not let him help her down and motioning him away arrived in a graceful lump in the soft mud where she sat for an instant, laughing at herself.	got down.

a graceful lump	They slowly descended from their perch. She would not let him help her down and motioning him away arrived in a graceful lump in the soft mud where she sat for an instant, laughing at herself. Then she jumped to her feet and slipped her hand into his, and they tiptoed across the fields, jumping and swinging from dry spot to dry spot.	a graceful fall

arrived in a graceful lump in the soft mud where she sat for an instant, laughing at herself.	They slowly descended from their perch. She would not let him help her down and motioning him away arrived in a graceful lump in the soft mud where she sat for an instant, laughing at herself. Then she jumped to her feet and slipped her hand into his, and they tiptoed across the fields, jumping and swinging from dry spot to dry spot.	landed awkwardly in the mud, sat there for a moment, and laughed at herself.

jumped to her feet and slipped her hand into his, and they tiptoed across the fields, jumping and swinging from dry spot to dry spot.	She would not let him help her down and motioning him away arrived in a graceful lump in the soft mud where she sat for an instant, laughing at herself. Then she jumped to her feet and slipped her hand into his, and they tiptoed across the fields, jumping and swinging from dry spot to dry spot. A transcendent delight seemed to sparkle in every pool of water, for the moon had risen and the storm had scurried away into western Maryland.	She stood up, took his hand, and they tiptoed across the fields, jumping and swinging to stay on the dry patches.

A transcendent delight	Then she jumped to her feet and slipped her hand into his, and they tiptoed across the fields, jumping and swinging from dry spot to dry spot. A transcendent delight seemed to sparkle in every pool of water, for the moon had risen and the storm had scurried away into western Maryland. When Eleanor’s arm touched his he felt his hands grow cold with deadly fear lest he should lose the shadow brush with which his imagination was painting wonders of her.	An overwhelming joy

risen and the storm had scurried away into western Maryland.	Then she jumped to her feet and slipped her hand into his, and they tiptoed across the fields, jumping and swinging from dry spot to dry spot. A transcendent delight seemed to sparkle in every pool of water, for the moon had risen and the storm had scurried away into western Maryland. When Eleanor’s arm touched his he felt his hands grow cold with deadly fear lest he should lose the shadow brush with which his imagination was painting wonders of her.	risen and the storm had hurried away into western Maryland.

Eleanor’s arm	A transcendent delight seemed to sparkle in every pool of water, for the moon had risen and the storm had scurried away into western Maryland. When Eleanor’s arm touched his he felt his hands grow cold with deadly fear lest he should lose the shadow brush with which his imagination was painting wonders of her. He watched her from the corners of his eyes as ever he did when he walked with her—she was a feast and a folly and he wished it had been his destiny to sit forever on a haystack and see life through her green eyes.	Eleanor's arm

see life through her green eyes.	When Eleanor’s arm touched his he felt his hands grow cold with deadly fear lest he should lose the shadow brush with which his imagination was painting wonders of her. He watched her from the corners of his eyes as ever he did when he walked with her—she was a feast and a folly and he wished it had been his destiny to sit forever on a haystack and see life through her green eyes. His paganism soared that night and when she faded out like a gray ghost down the road, a deep singing came out of the fields and filled his way homeward.	experience life from her perspective.

came out of the fields and filled his way homeward.	He watched her from the corners of his eyes as ever he did when he walked with her—she was a feast and a folly and he wished it had been his destiny to sit forever on a haystack and see life through her green eyes. His paganism soared that night and when she faded out like a gray ghost down the road, a deep singing came out of the fields and filled his way homeward. All night the summer moths flitted in and out of Amory’s window; all night large looming sounds swayed in mystic revery through the silver grain—and he lay awake in the clear darkness.	rose from the fields and accompanied him home.

the summer moths	His paganism soared that night and when she faded out like a gray ghost down the road, a deep singing came out of the fields and filled his way homeward. All night the summer moths flitted in and out of Amory’s window; all night large looming sounds swayed in mystic revery through the silver grain—and he lay awake in the clear darkness.	summer moths

Amory’s window	His paganism soared that night and when she faded out like a gray ghost down the road, a deep singing came out of the fields and filled his way homeward. All night the summer moths flitted in and out of Amory’s window; all night large looming sounds swayed in mystic revery through the silver grain—and he lay awake in the clear darkness.	Amory's window

mystic revery	His paganism soared that night and when she faded out like a gray ghost down the road, a deep singing came out of the fields and filled his way homeward. All night the summer moths flitted in and out of Amory’s window; all night large looming sounds swayed in mystic revery through the silver grain—and he lay awake in the clear darkness.	dreamy thoughts

lay awake in the clear darkness.	His paganism soared that night and when she faded out like a gray ghost down the road, a deep singing came out of the fields and filled his way homeward. All night the summer moths flitted in and out of Amory’s window; all night large looming sounds swayed in mystic revery through the silver grain—and he lay awake in the clear darkness.	stayed awake in the bright darkness.

blade of grass and nibbled at it scientifically.	Amory selected a blade of grass and nibbled at it scientifically. “I never fall in love in August or September,” he proffered.	grass and nibbled at it carefully.

fall in love in August or September,” he proffered.	Amory selected a blade of grass and nibbled at it scientifically. “I never fall in love in August or September,” he proffered. “When then?” “Christmas or Easter.	fall in love in August or September," he offered.

Spring in corsets!”	She turned up her nose. “Huh! Spring in corsets!” “Easter would bore spring, wouldn’t she?	Spring is too artificial and constrained!

“Huh! Spring	She turned up her nose. “Huh! Spring in corsets!” “Easter would bore spring, wouldn’t she?	Huh! Spring

a tailored suit	“Easter would bore spring, wouldn’t she? Easter has her hair braided, wears a tailored suit.” “Bind on thy sandals, oh, thou most fleet.	a fitted suit

Bind on thy sandals, oh, thou most fleet.	Easter has her hair braided, wears a tailored suit.” “Bind on thy sandals, oh, thou most fleet. Over the splendor and speed of thy feet—” quoted Eleanor softly, and then added: “I suppose Halloween is a better day for autumn than Thanksgiving.”	Put on your sandals, you who are so fast.

quoted Eleanor softly, and then added: “I suppose Halloween is a better day for autumn than Thanksgiving.”	“Bind on thy sandals, oh, thou most fleet. Over the splendor and speed of thy feet—” quoted Eleanor softly, and then added: “I suppose Halloween is a better day for autumn than Thanksgiving.” “Much better—and Christmas eve does very well for winter, but summer.”	Eleanor said softly, then added, "I think Halloween represents autumn better than Thanksgiving does."

the warm balmy nights	So many people have tried that the name’s become proverbial. Summer is only the unfulfilled promise of spring, a charlatan in place of the warm balmy nights I dream of in April. It’s a sad season of life without growth.	warm pleasant nights

only the unfulfilled promise	So many people have tried that the name’s become proverbial. Summer is only the unfulfilled promise of spring, a charlatan in place of the warm balmy nights I dream of in April. It’s a sad season of life without growth.	just a broken promise

place of the warm balmy nights I dream of in April.	So many people have tried that the name’s become proverbial. Summer is only the unfulfilled promise of spring, a charlatan in place of the warm balmy nights I dream of in April. It’s a sad season of life without growth.	the warm, pleasant nights I imagine in April.

Fourth of July,” Amory suggested facetiously.	It has no day.” “Fourth of July,” Amory suggested facetiously. “Don’t be funny!”	"The Fourth of July," Amory suggested jokingly.

raking him with her eyes.	“Don’t be funny!” she said, raking him with her eyes. “Well, what could fulfil the promise of spring?”	looking him up and down critically.

pagan heaven	She thought a moment. “Oh, I suppose heaven would, if there was one,” she said finally, “a sort of pagan heaven—you ought to be a materialist,” she continued irrelevantly. “Why?”	A heaven for non-Christians

was one,” she said finally, “a sort of pagan heaven—you ought to be a materialist,” she continued irrelevantly.	She thought a moment. “Oh, I suppose heaven would, if there was one,” she said finally, “a sort of pagan heaven—you ought to be a materialist,” she continued irrelevantly. “Why?”	was one," she said, "like a non-Christian heaven. You should be a materialist," she added, changing the subject.

pictures of Rupert Brooke.”	“Why?” “Because you look a good deal like the pictures of Rupert Brooke.” To some extent Amory tried to play Rupert Brooke as long as he knew Eleanor.	pictures of Rupert Brooke.

tried to play Rupert Brooke as long as he knew Eleanor.	“Because you look a good deal like the pictures of Rupert Brooke.” To some extent Amory tried to play Rupert Brooke as long as he knew Eleanor. What he said, his attitude toward life, toward her, toward himself, were all reflexes of the dead Englishman’s literary moods.	tried to act like Rupert Brooke while he was with Eleanor.

the dead Englishman’s literary moods	To some extent Amory tried to play Rupert Brooke as long as he knew Eleanor. What he said, his attitude toward life, toward her, toward himself, were all reflexes of the dead Englishman’s literary moods. Often she sat in the grass, a lazy wind playing with her short hair, her voice husky as she ran up and down the scale from Grantchester to Waikiki.	Rupert Brooke's writing style and feelings

reflexes of the dead Englishman’s literary moods.	To some extent Amory tried to play Rupert Brooke as long as he knew Eleanor. What he said, his attitude toward life, toward her, toward himself, were all reflexes of the dead Englishman’s literary moods. Often she sat in the grass, a lazy wind playing with her short hair, her voice husky as she ran up and down the scale from Grantchester to Waikiki.	reactions based on the dead Englishman's literary feelings.

ran up and down the scale from Grantchester to Waikiki.	What he said, his attitude toward life, toward her, toward himself, were all reflexes of the dead Englishman’s literary moods. Often she sat in the grass, a lazy wind playing with her short hair, her voice husky as she ran up and down the scale from Grantchester to Waikiki. There was something most passionate in Eleanor’s reading aloud.	jumped from English to Hawaiian subjects.

her voice husky	What he said, his attitude toward life, toward her, toward himself, were all reflexes of the dead Englishman’s literary moods. Often she sat in the grass, a lazy wind playing with her short hair, her voice husky as she ran up and down the scale from Grantchester to Waikiki. There was something most passionate in Eleanor’s reading aloud.	her voice was rough

something most passionate in Eleanor’s reading aloud.	Often she sat in the grass, a lazy wind playing with her short hair, her voice husky as she ran up and down the scale from Grantchester to Waikiki. There was something most passionate in Eleanor’s reading aloud. They seemed nearer, not only mentally, but physically, when they read, than when she was in his arms, and this was often, for they fell half into love almost from the first.	Eleanor's voice was full of passion when she read aloud.

seemed nearer, not only mentally, but physically, when they read, than when she was in his arms, and this was often, for they fell half into love almost from the first.	There was something most passionate in Eleanor’s reading aloud. They seemed nearer, not only mentally, but physically, when they read, than when she was in his arms, and this was often, for they fell half into love almost from the first. Yet was Amory capable of love now?	They felt closer when they read together, both in mind and body, than when they were embracing, which happened a lot since they quickly started falling in love.

revelled in their imaginations, he knew that neither of them could care as he had cared once before—I suppose that was why they turned to Brooke, and Swinburne, and Shelley.	Yet was Amory capable of love now? He could, as always, run through the emotions in a half hour, but even while they revelled in their imaginations, he knew that neither of them could care as he had cared once before—I suppose that was why they turned to Brooke, and Swinburne, and Shelley. Their chance was to make everything fine and finished and rich and imaginative; they must bend tiny golden tentacles from his imagination to hers, that would take the place of the great, deep love that was never so near, yet never so much of a dream.	enjoyed their fantasies, he knew they couldn't feel as deeply as he once had—I guess that's why they liked Brooke, Swinburne, and Shelley.

tiny golden tentacles	He could, as always, run through the emotions in a half hour, but even while they revelled in their imaginations, he knew that neither of them could care as he had cared once before—I suppose that was why they turned to Brooke, and Swinburne, and Shelley. Their chance was to make everything fine and finished and rich and imaginative; they must bend tiny golden tentacles from his imagination to hers, that would take the place of the great, deep love that was never so near, yet never so much of a dream. One poem they read over and over; Swinburne’s Triumph of Time, and four lines of it rang in his memory afterward on warm nights when he saw the fireflies among dusky tree trunks and heard the low drone of many frogs.	small, beautiful connections

Triumph of Time, and four lines of it rang in his memory afterward on warm nights when he saw the fireflies among dusky tree trunks and heard the low drone of many frogs.	Their chance was to make everything fine and finished and rich and imaginative; they must bend tiny golden tentacles from his imagination to hers, that would take the place of the great, deep love that was never so near, yet never so much of a dream. One poem they read over and over; Swinburne’s Triumph of Time, and four lines of it rang in his memory afterward on warm nights when he saw the fireflies among dusky tree trunks and heard the low drone of many frogs. Then Eleanor seemed to come out of the night and stand by him, and he heard her throaty voice, with its tone of a fleecy-headed drum, repeating: “Is it worth a tear, is it worth an hour, To think of things that are well outworn; Of fruitless husk and fugitive flower, The dream foregone and the deed foreborne?”	Triumph of Time, and four lines from it stayed in his mind afterwards on warm nights when he saw fireflies among dark trees and heard the deep croaking of many frogs.

the low drone	Their chance was to make everything fine and finished and rich and imaginative; they must bend tiny golden tentacles from his imagination to hers, that would take the place of the great, deep love that was never so near, yet never so much of a dream. One poem they read over and over; Swinburne’s Triumph of Time, and four lines of it rang in his memory afterward on warm nights when he saw the fireflies among dusky tree trunks and heard the low drone of many frogs. Then Eleanor seemed to come out of the night and stand by him, and he heard her throaty voice, with its tone of a fleecy-headed drum, repeating: “Is it worth a tear, is it worth an hour, To think of things that are well outworn; Of fruitless husk and fugitive flower, The dream foregone and the deed foreborne?”	the low hum

Swinburne’s Triumph	Their chance was to make everything fine and finished and rich and imaginative; they must bend tiny golden tentacles from his imagination to hers, that would take the place of the great, deep love that was never so near, yet never so much of a dream. One poem they read over and over; Swinburne’s Triumph of Time, and four lines of it rang in his memory afterward on warm nights when he saw the fireflies among dusky tree trunks and heard the low drone of many frogs. Then Eleanor seemed to come out of the night and stand by him, and he heard her throaty voice, with its tone of a fleecy-headed drum, repeating: “Is it worth a tear, is it worth an hour, To think of things that are well outworn; Of fruitless husk and fugitive flower, The dream foregone and the deed foreborne?”	Swinburne's Triumph

dusky tree trunks	Their chance was to make everything fine and finished and rich and imaginative; they must bend tiny golden tentacles from his imagination to hers, that would take the place of the great, deep love that was never so near, yet never so much of a dream. One poem they read over and over; Swinburne’s Triumph of Time, and four lines of it rang in his memory afterward on warm nights when he saw the fireflies among dusky tree trunks and heard the low drone of many frogs. Then Eleanor seemed to come out of the night and stand by him, and he heard her throaty voice, with its tone of a fleecy-headed drum, repeating: “Is it worth a tear, is it worth an hour, To think of things that are well outworn; Of fruitless husk and fugitive flower, The dream foregone and the deed foreborne?”	dark tree trunks

her throaty voice	One poem they read over and over; Swinburne’s Triumph of Time, and four lines of it rang in his memory afterward on warm nights when he saw the fireflies among dusky tree trunks and heard the low drone of many frogs. Then Eleanor seemed to come out of the night and stand by him, and he heard her throaty voice, with its tone of a fleecy-headed drum, repeating: “Is it worth a tear, is it worth an hour, To think of things that are well outworn; Of fruitless husk and fugitive flower, The dream foregone and the deed foreborne?” They were formally introduced two days later, and his aunt told him her history.	her deep voice

fruitless husk	One poem they read over and over; Swinburne’s Triumph of Time, and four lines of it rang in his memory afterward on warm nights when he saw the fireflies among dusky tree trunks and heard the low drone of many frogs. Then Eleanor seemed to come out of the night and stand by him, and he heard her throaty voice, with its tone of a fleecy-headed drum, repeating: “Is it worth a tear, is it worth an hour, To think of things that are well outworn; Of fruitless husk and fugitive flower, The dream foregone and the deed foreborne?” They were formally introduced two days later, and his aunt told him her history.	useless remains

The dream foregone	One poem they read over and over; Swinburne’s Triumph of Time, and four lines of it rang in his memory afterward on warm nights when he saw the fireflies among dusky tree trunks and heard the low drone of many frogs. Then Eleanor seemed to come out of the night and stand by him, and he heard her throaty voice, with its tone of a fleecy-headed drum, repeating: “Is it worth a tear, is it worth an hour, To think of things that are well outworn; Of fruitless husk and fugitive flower, The dream foregone and the deed foreborne?” They were formally introduced two days later, and his aunt told him her history.	The dream that's gone.

things that are well outworn; Of fruitless husk and fugitive flower, The dream foregone and the deed foreborne?”	One poem they read over and over; Swinburne’s Triumph of Time, and four lines of it rang in his memory afterward on warm nights when he saw the fireflies among dusky tree trunks and heard the low drone of many frogs. Then Eleanor seemed to come out of the night and stand by him, and he heard her throaty voice, with its tone of a fleecy-headed drum, repeating: “Is it worth a tear, is it worth an hour, To think of things that are well outworn; Of fruitless husk and fugitive flower, The dream foregone and the deed foreborne?” They were formally introduced two days later, and his aunt told him her history.	things that are completely used up; like empty seed pods and faded flowers, a dream given up and an action not taken?

the deed foreborne	One poem they read over and over; Swinburne’s Triumph of Time, and four lines of it rang in his memory afterward on warm nights when he saw the fireflies among dusky tree trunks and heard the low drone of many frogs. Then Eleanor seemed to come out of the night and stand by him, and he heard her throaty voice, with its tone of a fleecy-headed drum, repeating: “Is it worth a tear, is it worth an hour, To think of things that are well outworn; Of fruitless husk and fugitive flower, The dream foregone and the deed foreborne?” They were formally introduced two days later, and his aunt told him her history.	the action not taken

fugitive flower	One poem they read over and over; Swinburne’s Triumph of Time, and four lines of it rang in his memory afterward on warm nights when he saw the fireflies among dusky tree trunks and heard the low drone of many frogs. Then Eleanor seemed to come out of the night and stand by him, and he heard her throaty voice, with its tone of a fleecy-headed drum, repeating: “Is it worth a tear, is it worth an hour, To think of things that are well outworn; Of fruitless husk and fugitive flower, The dream foregone and the deed foreborne?” They were formally introduced two days later, and his aunt told him her history.	A flower that has faded and disappeared.

a fleecy-headed drum	One poem they read over and over; Swinburne’s Triumph of Time, and four lines of it rang in his memory afterward on warm nights when he saw the fireflies among dusky tree trunks and heard the low drone of many frogs. Then Eleanor seemed to come out of the night and stand by him, and he heard her throaty voice, with its tone of a fleecy-headed drum, repeating: “Is it worth a tear, is it worth an hour, To think of things that are well outworn; Of fruitless husk and fugitive flower, The dream foregone and the deed foreborne?” They were formally introduced two days later, and his aunt told him her history.	like a drum with a soft, woolly sound

two: old Mr. Ramilly	They were formally introduced two days later, and his aunt told him her history. The Ramillys were two: old Mr. Ramilly and his granddaughter, Eleanor. She had lived in France with a restless mother whom Amory imagined to have been very like his own, on whose death she had come to America, to live in Maryland.	two: old Mr. Ramilly

granddaughter, Eleanor.	They were formally introduced two days later, and his aunt told him her history. The Ramillys were two: old Mr. Ramilly and his granddaughter, Eleanor. She had lived in France with a restless mother whom Amory imagined to have been very like his own, on whose death she had come to America, to live in Maryland.	granddaughter, Eleanor.

a restless mother	The Ramillys were two: old Mr. Ramilly and his granddaughter, Eleanor. She had lived in France with a restless mother whom Amory imagined to have been very like his own, on whose death she had come to America, to live in Maryland. She had gone to Baltimore first to stay with a bachelor uncle, and there she insisted on being a debutante at the age of seventeen.	a mother who couldn't stay in one place

stay with a bachelor uncle, and there she insisted on being a debutante at the age of seventeen.	She had lived in France with a restless mother whom Amory imagined to have been very like his own, on whose death she had come to America, to live in Maryland. She had gone to Baltimore first to stay with a bachelor uncle, and there she insisted on being a debutante at the age of seventeen. She had a wild winter and arrived in the country in March, having quarrelled frantically with all her Baltimore relatives, and shocked them into fiery protest.	live with her unmarried uncle, where she insisted on having a debutante ball at seventeen.

arrived in the country in March, having quarrelled frantically with all her Baltimore relatives, and shocked them into fiery protest.	She had gone to Baltimore first to stay with a bachelor uncle, and there she insisted on being a debutante at the age of seventeen. She had a wild winter and arrived in the country in March, having quarrelled frantically with all her Baltimore relatives, and shocked them into fiery protest. A rather fast crowd had come out, who drank cocktails in limousines and were promiscuously condescending and patronizing toward older people, and Eleanor with an esprit that hinted strongly of the boulevards, led many innocents still redolent of St. Timothy’s and Farmington, into paths of Bohemian naughtiness.	She arrived in the countryside in March after fighting intensely with her Baltimore relatives and shocking them into strong opposition.

fiery protest	She had gone to Baltimore first to stay with a bachelor uncle, and there she insisted on being a debutante at the age of seventeen. She had a wild winter and arrived in the country in March, having quarrelled frantically with all her Baltimore relatives, and shocked them into fiery protest. A rather fast crowd had come out, who drank cocktails in limousines and were promiscuously condescending and patronizing toward older people, and Eleanor with an esprit that hinted strongly of the boulevards, led many innocents still redolent of St. Timothy’s and Farmington, into paths of Bohemian naughtiness.	angry objections

esprit that hinted strongly of the boulevards, led many innocents still redolent of St. Timothy’s and Farmington, into paths of Bohemian naughtiness.	She had a wild winter and arrived in the country in March, having quarrelled frantically with all her Baltimore relatives, and shocked them into fiery protest. A rather fast crowd had come out, who drank cocktails in limousines and were promiscuously condescending and patronizing toward older people, and Eleanor with an esprit that hinted strongly of the boulevards, led many innocents still redolent of St. Timothy’s and Farmington, into paths of Bohemian naughtiness. When the story came to her uncle, a forgetful cavalier of a more hypocritical era, there was a scene, from which Eleanor emerged, subdued but rebellious and indignant, to seek haven with her grandfather who hovered in the country on the near side of senility.	a spirited attitude that suggested a worldly lifestyle, led many naive girls fresh from boarding school into unconventional and slightly scandalous behavior.

Bohemian naughtiness	She had a wild winter and arrived in the country in March, having quarrelled frantically with all her Baltimore relatives, and shocked them into fiery protest. A rather fast crowd had come out, who drank cocktails in limousines and were promiscuously condescending and patronizing toward older people, and Eleanor with an esprit that hinted strongly of the boulevards, led many innocents still redolent of St. Timothy’s and Farmington, into paths of Bohemian naughtiness. When the story came to her uncle, a forgetful cavalier of a more hypocritical era, there was a scene, from which Eleanor emerged, subdued but rebellious and indignant, to seek haven with her grandfather who hovered in the country on the near side of senility.	unconventional and slightly scandalous behavior

scene, from which Eleanor emerged, subdued but rebellious and indignant, to seek haven with her grandfather who hovered in the country on the near side of senility.	A rather fast crowd had come out, who drank cocktails in limousines and were promiscuously condescending and patronizing toward older people, and Eleanor with an esprit that hinted strongly of the boulevards, led many innocents still redolent of St. Timothy’s and Farmington, into paths of Bohemian naughtiness. When the story came to her uncle, a forgetful cavalier of a more hypocritical era, there was a scene, from which Eleanor emerged, subdued but rebellious and indignant, to seek haven with her grandfather who hovered in the country on the near side of senility. That’s as far as her story went; she told him the rest herself, but that was later.	Eleanor left that situation feeling silenced but also rebellious and angry, and went to stay with her grandfather, who was old and starting to lose his mental sharpness, in the countryside.

a forgetful cavalier	A rather fast crowd had come out, who drank cocktails in limousines and were promiscuously condescending and patronizing toward older people, and Eleanor with an esprit that hinted strongly of the boulevards, led many innocents still redolent of St. Timothy’s and Farmington, into paths of Bohemian naughtiness. When the story came to her uncle, a forgetful cavalier of a more hypocritical era, there was a scene, from which Eleanor emerged, subdued but rebellious and indignant, to seek haven with her grandfather who hovered in the country on the near side of senility. That’s as far as her story went; she told him the rest herself, but that was later.	a man with old-fashioned manners who was also absent-minded

a more hypocritical era	A rather fast crowd had come out, who drank cocktails in limousines and were promiscuously condescending and patronizing toward older people, and Eleanor with an esprit that hinted strongly of the boulevards, led many innocents still redolent of St. Timothy’s and Farmington, into paths of Bohemian naughtiness. When the story came to her uncle, a forgetful cavalier of a more hypocritical era, there was a scene, from which Eleanor emerged, subdued but rebellious and indignant, to seek haven with her grandfather who hovered in the country on the near side of senility. That’s as far as her story went; she told him the rest herself, but that was later.	a time when people were more dishonest

far as her story went; she told him the rest herself, but that was later.	When the story came to her uncle, a forgetful cavalier of a more hypocritical era, there was a scene, from which Eleanor emerged, subdued but rebellious and indignant, to seek haven with her grandfather who hovered in the country on the near side of senility. That’s as far as her story went; she told him the rest herself, but that was later. Often they swam and as Amory floated lazily in the water he shut his mind to all thoughts except those of hazy soap-bubble lands where the sun splattered through wind-drunk trees.	That's where her story ended; she told him the rest herself, but that happened later.

floated lazily in the water he shut his mind to all thoughts except those of hazy soap-bubble lands where the sun splattered through wind-drunk trees.	That’s as far as her story went; she told him the rest herself, but that was later. Often they swam and as Amory floated lazily in the water he shut his mind to all thoughts except those of hazy soap-bubble lands where the sun splattered through wind-drunk trees. How could anyone possibly think or worry, or do anything except splash and dive and loll there on the edge of time while the flower months failed.	floated in the water and emptied his mind of everything except dreamlike, shimmering places where sunlight scattered through trees swaying in the wind.

hazy soap-bubble lands	That’s as far as her story went; she told him the rest herself, but that was later. Often they swam and as Amory floated lazily in the water he shut his mind to all thoughts except those of hazy soap-bubble lands where the sun splattered through wind-drunk trees. How could anyone possibly think or worry, or do anything except splash and dive and loll there on the edge of time while the flower months failed.	dreamy, carefree places

loll there on the edge of time while the flower months failed.	Often they swam and as Amory floated lazily in the water he shut his mind to all thoughts except those of hazy soap-bubble lands where the sun splattered through wind-drunk trees. How could anyone possibly think or worry, or do anything except splash and dive and loll there on the edge of time while the flower months failed. Let the days move over—sadness and memory and pain recurred outside, and here, once more, before he went on to meet them he wanted to drift and be young.	relax there, outside of time, while the beautiful summer months passed.

wanted to drift and be young.	How could anyone possibly think or worry, or do anything except splash and dive and loll there on the edge of time while the flower months failed. Let the days move over—sadness and memory and pain recurred outside, and here, once more, before he went on to meet them he wanted to drift and be young. There were days when Amory resented that life had changed from an even progress along a road stretching ever in sight, with the scenery merging and blending, into a succession of quick, unrelated scenes—two years of sweat and blood, that sudden absurd instinct for paternity that Rosalind had stirred; the half-sensual, half-neurotic quality of this autumn with Eleanor.	wanted to relax and feel young again.

the half-sensual, half-neurotic quality	Let the days move over—sadness and memory and pain recurred outside, and here, once more, before he went on to meet them he wanted to drift and be young. There were days when Amory resented that life had changed from an even progress along a road stretching ever in sight, with the scenery merging and blending, into a succession of quick, unrelated scenes—two years of sweat and blood, that sudden absurd instinct for paternity that Rosalind had stirred; the half-sensual, half-neurotic quality of this autumn with Eleanor. He felt that it would take all time, more than he could ever spare, to glue these strange cumbersome pictures into the scrapbook of his life.	the feeling that was part physical desire and part mental anxiety

that sudden absurd instinct	Let the days move over—sadness and memory and pain recurred outside, and here, once more, before he went on to meet them he wanted to drift and be young. There were days when Amory resented that life had changed from an even progress along a road stretching ever in sight, with the scenery merging and blending, into a succession of quick, unrelated scenes—two years of sweat and blood, that sudden absurd instinct for paternity that Rosalind had stirred; the half-sensual, half-neurotic quality of this autumn with Eleanor. He felt that it would take all time, more than he could ever spare, to glue these strange cumbersome pictures into the scrapbook of his life.	that sudden ridiculous urge

instinct for paternity that Rosalind had stirred; the half-sensual, half-neurotic quality of this autumn with Eleanor.	Let the days move over—sadness and memory and pain recurred outside, and here, once more, before he went on to meet them he wanted to drift and be young. There were days when Amory resented that life had changed from an even progress along a road stretching ever in sight, with the scenery merging and blending, into a succession of quick, unrelated scenes—two years of sweat and blood, that sudden absurd instinct for paternity that Rosalind had stirred; the half-sensual, half-neurotic quality of this autumn with Eleanor. He felt that it would take all time, more than he could ever spare, to glue these strange cumbersome pictures into the scrapbook of his life.	the desire to be a father that Rosalind had awakened; the partly sexual, partly crazy feeling of this autumn with Eleanor.

quick, unrelated scenes	Let the days move over—sadness and memory and pain recurred outside, and here, once more, before he went on to meet them he wanted to drift and be young. There were days when Amory resented that life had changed from an even progress along a road stretching ever in sight, with the scenery merging and blending, into a succession of quick, unrelated scenes—two years of sweat and blood, that sudden absurd instinct for paternity that Rosalind had stirred; the half-sensual, half-neurotic quality of this autumn with Eleanor. He felt that it would take all time, more than he could ever spare, to glue these strange cumbersome pictures into the scrapbook of his life.	scenes that didn't connect or flow together

these strange cumbersome pictures	There were days when Amory resented that life had changed from an even progress along a road stretching ever in sight, with the scenery merging and blending, into a succession of quick, unrelated scenes—two years of sweat and blood, that sudden absurd instinct for paternity that Rosalind had stirred; the half-sensual, half-neurotic quality of this autumn with Eleanor. He felt that it would take all time, more than he could ever spare, to glue these strange cumbersome pictures into the scrapbook of his life. It was all like a banquet where he sat for this half-hour of his youth and tried to enjoy brilliant epicurean courses.	these odd, awkward memories

scrapbook of his life.	There were days when Amory resented that life had changed from an even progress along a road stretching ever in sight, with the scenery merging and blending, into a succession of quick, unrelated scenes—two years of sweat and blood, that sudden absurd instinct for paternity that Rosalind had stirred; the half-sensual, half-neurotic quality of this autumn with Eleanor. He felt that it would take all time, more than he could ever spare, to glue these strange cumbersome pictures into the scrapbook of his life. It was all like a banquet where he sat for this half-hour of his youth and tried to enjoy brilliant epicurean courses.	memory of his life.

sat for this half-hour of his youth and tried to enjoy brilliant epicurean courses.	He felt that it would take all time, more than he could ever spare, to glue these strange cumbersome pictures into the scrapbook of his life. It was all like a banquet where he sat for this half-hour of his youth and tried to enjoy brilliant epicurean courses. Dimly he promised himself a time where all should be welded together.	spent this brief time of his youth trying to savor amazing and delightful experiences.

brilliant epicurean courses	He felt that it would take all time, more than he could ever spare, to glue these strange cumbersome pictures into the scrapbook of his life. It was all like a banquet where he sat for this half-hour of his youth and tried to enjoy brilliant epicurean courses. Dimly he promised himself a time where all should be welded together.	amazing and luxurious experiences

time where all should be welded together.	It was all like a banquet where he sat for this half-hour of his youth and tried to enjoy brilliant epicurean courses. Dimly he promised himself a time where all should be welded together. For months it seemed that he had alternated between being borne along a stream of love or fascination, or left in an eddy, and in the eddies he had not desired to think, rather to be picked up on a wave’s top and swept along again.	a time when everything would come together.

borne along a stream of love or fascination, or left in an eddy, and in the eddies he had not desired to think, rather to be picked up on a wave’s top and swept along again.	Dimly he promised himself a time where all should be welded together. For months it seemed that he had alternated between being borne along a stream of love or fascination, or left in an eddy, and in the eddies he had not desired to think, rather to be picked up on a wave’s top and swept along again. “The despairing, dying autumn and our love—how well they harmonize!” said Eleanor sadly one day as they lay dripping by the water.	carried by a flood of love or infatuation, or abandoned in a stagnant pool, and when stuck there, he didn't want to think, preferring to be lifted by a wave and swept away once more.

a wave’s top	Dimly he promised himself a time where all should be welded together. For months it seemed that he had alternated between being borne along a stream of love or fascination, or left in an eddy, and in the eddies he had not desired to think, rather to be picked up on a wave’s top and swept along again. “The despairing, dying autumn and our love—how well they harmonize!” said Eleanor sadly one day as they lay dripping by the water.	the crest of a wave

The despairing, dying autumn	For months it seemed that he had alternated between being borne along a stream of love or fascination, or left in an eddy, and in the eddies he had not desired to think, rather to be picked up on a wave’s top and swept along again. “The despairing, dying autumn and our love—how well they harmonize!” said Eleanor sadly one day as they lay dripping by the water. “The Indian summer of our hearts—” he ceased.	The sad, fading autumn

day as they lay dripping by the water.	For months it seemed that he had alternated between being borne along a stream of love or fascination, or left in an eddy, and in the eddies he had not desired to think, rather to be picked up on a wave’s top and swept along again. “The despairing, dying autumn and our love—how well they harmonize!” said Eleanor sadly one day as they lay dripping by the water. “The Indian summer of our hearts—” he ceased.	day as they lay wet by the water.

summer of our hearts—” he ceased.	“The despairing, dying autumn and our love—how well they harmonize!” said Eleanor sadly one day as they lay dripping by the water. “The Indian summer of our hearts—” he ceased. “Tell me,” she said finally, “was she light or dark?”	summer of our hearts—” he stopped.

curious elfin love moods	“I don’t know,” said Amory shortly. One night they walked while the moon rose and poured a great burden of glory over the garden until it seemed fairyland with Amory and Eleanor, dim phantasmal shapes, expressing eternal beauty in curious elfin love moods. Then they turned out of the moonlight into the trellised darkness of a vine-hung pagoda, where there were scents so plaintive as to be nearly musical.	strange, whimsical expressions of love

dim phantasmal shapes	“I don’t know,” said Amory shortly. One night they walked while the moon rose and poured a great burden of glory over the garden until it seemed fairyland with Amory and Eleanor, dim phantasmal shapes, expressing eternal beauty in curious elfin love moods. Then they turned out of the moonlight into the trellised darkness of a vine-hung pagoda, where there were scents so plaintive as to be nearly musical.	faint, ghostly figures

expressing eternal beauty in curious elfin love moods.	“I don’t know,” said Amory shortly. One night they walked while the moon rose and poured a great burden of glory over the garden until it seemed fairyland with Amory and Eleanor, dim phantasmal shapes, expressing eternal beauty in curious elfin love moods. Then they turned out of the moonlight into the trellised darkness of a vine-hung pagoda, where there were scents so plaintive as to be nearly musical.	showing never-ending beauty in strange, magical ways of loving.

pagoda, where there were scents so plaintive as to be nearly musical.	One night they walked while the moon rose and poured a great burden of glory over the garden until it seemed fairyland with Amory and Eleanor, dim phantasmal shapes, expressing eternal beauty in curious elfin love moods. Then they turned out of the moonlight into the trellised darkness of a vine-hung pagoda, where there were scents so plaintive as to be nearly musical. “Light a match,” she whispered.	a gazebo where the smells were so sad they almost sounded like music.

a vine-hung pagoda	One night they walked while the moon rose and poured a great burden of glory over the garden until it seemed fairyland with Amory and Eleanor, dim phantasmal shapes, expressing eternal beauty in curious elfin love moods. Then they turned out of the moonlight into the trellised darkness of a vine-hung pagoda, where there were scents so plaintive as to be nearly musical. “Light a match,” she whispered.	a gazebo covered in vines

the trellised darkness	One night they walked while the moon rose and poured a great burden of glory over the garden until it seemed fairyland with Amory and Eleanor, dim phantasmal shapes, expressing eternal beauty in curious elfin love moods. Then they turned out of the moonlight into the trellised darkness of a vine-hung pagoda, where there were scents so plaintive as to be nearly musical. “Light a match,” she whispered.	the dark, latticed shade

the scarred trees	Flare! The night and the scarred trees were like scenery in a play, and to be there with Eleanor, shadowy and unreal, seemed somehow oddly familiar. Amory thought how it was only the past that ever seemed strange and unbelievable.	the damaged trees

be there with Eleanor, shadowy and unreal, seemed somehow oddly familiar.	Flare! The night and the scarred trees were like scenery in a play, and to be there with Eleanor, shadowy and unreal, seemed somehow oddly familiar. Amory thought how it was only the past that ever seemed strange and unbelievable.	being with Eleanor, shadowy and unreal, felt strangely familiar.

past that ever seemed strange and unbelievable.	The night and the scarred trees were like scenery in a play, and to be there with Eleanor, shadowy and unreal, seemed somehow oddly familiar. Amory thought how it was only the past that ever seemed strange and unbelievable. The match went out.	Only the past felt strange and unbelievable.

“little lonesome voices	“It’s black as pitch.” “We’re just voices now,” murmured Eleanor, “little lonesome voices. Light another.”	lonely little voices

twisted in through the vines and listened.	he cried wildly. the moonlight twisted in through the vines and listened. the fireflies hung upon their whispers as if to win his glance from the glory of their eyes.	shone through the vines and seemed to listen.

stirring in the grass; not one wind stirs.	“No wind is stirring in the grass; not one wind stirs. the water in the hidden pools, as glass, fronts the full moon and so inters the golden token in its icy mass,” chanted Eleanor to the trees that skeletoned the body of the night.	The grass isn't moving; there's no wind at all.

fronts the full moon and so inters the golden token in its icy mass,” chanted Eleanor to the trees that skeletoned the body of the night.	“No wind is stirring in the grass; not one wind stirs. the water in the hidden pools, as glass, fronts the full moon and so inters the golden token in its icy mass,” chanted Eleanor to the trees that skeletoned the body of the night. “Isn’t it ghostly here?	reflects the full moon and buries the golden reflection in its still surface," chanted Eleanor to the trees that formed the bare outline of the night.

its icy mass	“No wind is stirring in the grass; not one wind stirs. the water in the hidden pools, as glass, fronts the full moon and so inters the golden token in its icy mass,” chanted Eleanor to the trees that skeletoned the body of the night. “Isn’t it ghostly here?	its frozen surface

let’s cut through the woods and find the hidden pools.”	“Isn’t it ghostly here? If you can hold your horse’s feet up, let’s cut through the woods and find the hidden pools.” “It’s after one, and you’ll get the devil,” he objected, “and I don’t know enough about horses to put one away in the pitch dark.”	Let's go through the woods and find the secret pools.

’s after one, and you’ll get the devil,” he objected, “and I don’t know enough about horses to put one away in the pitch dark.”	If you can hold your horse’s feet up, let’s cut through the woods and find the hidden pools.” “It’s after one, and you’ll get the devil,” he objected, “and I don’t know enough about horses to put one away in the pitch dark.” “Shut up, you old fool,” she whispered irrelevantly, and, leaning over, she patted him lazily with her riding-crop.	It's past one, and you'll be in trouble," he said, "and I don't know enough about horses to stable one in complete darkness.

“Shut up, you old fool	“It’s after one, and you’ll get the devil,” he objected, “and I don’t know enough about horses to put one away in the pitch dark.” “Shut up, you old fool,” she whispered irrelevantly, and, leaning over, she patted him lazily with her riding-crop. “You can leave your old plug in our stable and I’ll send him over tomorrow.”	"Be quiet, you old fool."

patted him lazily with her riding-crop.	“It’s after one, and you’ll get the devil,” he objected, “and I don’t know enough about horses to put one away in the pitch dark.” “Shut up, you old fool,” she whispered irrelevantly, and, leaning over, she patted him lazily with her riding-crop. “You can leave your old plug in our stable and I’ll send him over tomorrow.”	hit him lightly with her riding crop.

leave your old plug in our stable and I’ll send him over tomorrow.”	“Shut up, you old fool,” she whispered irrelevantly, and, leaning over, she patted him lazily with her riding-crop. “You can leave your old plug in our stable and I’ll send him over tomorrow.” “But my uncle has got to drive me to the station with this old plug at seven o’clock.”	Leave your old horse in our stable and I'll send him to you tomorrow.

drive me to the station with this old plug at seven o’clock.”	“You can leave your old plug in our stable and I’ll send him over tomorrow.” “But my uncle has got to drive me to the station with this old plug at seven o’clock.” “Don’t be a spoilsport—remember, you have a tendency toward wavering that prevents you from being the entire light of my life.”	drive me to the station in this old car at seven o'clock.

seven o’clock	“You can leave your old plug in our stable and I’ll send him over tomorrow.” “But my uncle has got to drive me to the station with this old plug at seven o’clock.” “Don’t be a spoilsport—remember, you have a tendency toward wavering that prevents you from being the entire light of my life.”	seven o'clock

grasped her hand.	“Don’t be a spoilsport—remember, you have a tendency toward wavering that prevents you from being the entire light of my life.” Amory drew his horse up close beside, and, leaning toward her, grasped her hand. “Say I am—quick, or I’ll pull you over and make you ride behind me.”	took her hand.

Harper’s Hill	Why are all the exciting things so uncomfortable, like fighting and exploring and skiing in Canada? By the way, we’re going to ride up Harper’s Hill. I think that comes in our programme about five o’clock.”	Harper's Hill

going to ride up Harper’s Hill.	Why are all the exciting things so uncomfortable, like fighting and exploring and skiing in Canada? By the way, we’re going to ride up Harper’s Hill. I think that comes in our programme about five o’clock.”	We're going to ride up Harper's Hill.

comes in our programme about five o’clock.”	By the way, we’re going to ride up Harper’s Hill. I think that comes in our programme about five o’clock.” “You little devil,” Amory growled.	it's scheduled for around five o'clock.

about five o’clock	By the way, we’re going to ride up Harper’s Hill. I think that comes in our programme about five o’clock.” “You little devil,” Amory growled.	around five o'clock

train like an immigrant all day tomorrow, going back to New York.”	“You little devil,” Amory growled. “You’re going to make me stay up all night and sleep in the train like an immigrant all day tomorrow, going back to New York.” “Hush!	train like an immigrant all day tomorrow, going back to New York.

coming along the road—let’s go!	“Hush! someone’s coming along the road—let’s go! Whoo-ee-oop!”	Someone's coming down the road—let's go!

the belated traveller	Whoo-ee-oop!” And with a shout that probably gave the belated traveller a series of shivers, she turned her horse into the woods and Amory followed slowly, as he had followed her all day for three weeks. The summer was over, but he had spent the days in watching Eleanor, a graceful, facile Manfred, build herself intellectual and imaginative pyramids while she revelled in the artificialities of the temperamental teens and they wrote poetry at the dinner-table.	someone traveling late

followed her all day for three weeks.	Whoo-ee-oop!” And with a shout that probably gave the belated traveller a series of shivers, she turned her horse into the woods and Amory followed slowly, as he had followed her all day for three weeks. The summer was over, but he had spent the days in watching Eleanor, a graceful, facile Manfred, build herself intellectual and imaginative pyramids while she revelled in the artificialities of the temperamental teens and they wrote poetry at the dinner-table.	followed her every day for three weeks.

Eleanor, a graceful, facile Manfred, build herself intellectual and imaginative pyramids while she revelled in the artificialities of the temperamental teens and they wrote poetry at the dinner-table.	And with a shout that probably gave the belated traveller a series of shivers, she turned her horse into the woods and Amory followed slowly, as he had followed her all day for three weeks. The summer was over, but he had spent the days in watching Eleanor, a graceful, facile Manfred, build herself intellectual and imaginative pyramids while she revelled in the artificialities of the temperamental teens and they wrote poetry at the dinner-table. When Vanity kissed Vanity, a hundred happy Junes ago, he pondered o’er her breathlessly, and, that all men might ever know, he rhymed her eyes with life and death: “Through Time I’ll save my love!”	Eleanor, like a graceful and skilled character from Manfred, constructed complex intellectual and imaginative ideas while enjoying the dramatic emotions of teenagers, and they even wrote poems during dinner.

the temperamental teens	And with a shout that probably gave the belated traveller a series of shivers, she turned her horse into the woods and Amory followed slowly, as he had followed her all day for three weeks. The summer was over, but he had spent the days in watching Eleanor, a graceful, facile Manfred, build herself intellectual and imaginative pyramids while she revelled in the artificialities of the temperamental teens and they wrote poetry at the dinner-table. When Vanity kissed Vanity, a hundred happy Junes ago, he pondered o’er her breathlessly, and, that all men might ever know, he rhymed her eyes with life and death: “Through Time I’ll save my love!”	moody teenagers

a graceful, facile Manfred	And with a shout that probably gave the belated traveller a series of shivers, she turned her horse into the woods and Amory followed slowly, as he had followed her all day for three weeks. The summer was over, but he had spent the days in watching Eleanor, a graceful, facile Manfred, build herself intellectual and imaginative pyramids while she revelled in the artificialities of the temperamental teens and they wrote poetry at the dinner-table. When Vanity kissed Vanity, a hundred happy Junes ago, he pondered o’er her breathlessly, and, that all men might ever know, he rhymed her eyes with life and death: “Through Time I’ll save my love!”	A graceful, easy-going Manfred

herself intellectual and imaginative pyramids	And with a shout that probably gave the belated traveller a series of shivers, she turned her horse into the woods and Amory followed slowly, as he had followed her all day for three weeks. The summer was over, but he had spent the days in watching Eleanor, a graceful, facile Manfred, build herself intellectual and imaginative pyramids while she revelled in the artificialities of the temperamental teens and they wrote poetry at the dinner-table. When Vanity kissed Vanity, a hundred happy Junes ago, he pondered o’er her breathlessly, and, that all men might ever know, he rhymed her eyes with life and death: “Through Time I’ll save my love!”	building up her intellect and imagination

a hundred happy Junes	The summer was over, but he had spent the days in watching Eleanor, a graceful, facile Manfred, build herself intellectual and imaginative pyramids while she revelled in the artificialities of the temperamental teens and they wrote poetry at the dinner-table. When Vanity kissed Vanity, a hundred happy Junes ago, he pondered o’er her breathlessly, and, that all men might ever know, he rhymed her eyes with life and death: “Through Time I’ll save my love!” he said.	A hundred happy years.

rhymed her eyes with life and death: “Through Time I’ll save my love!”	The summer was over, but he had spent the days in watching Eleanor, a graceful, facile Manfred, build herself intellectual and imaginative pyramids while she revelled in the artificialities of the temperamental teens and they wrote poetry at the dinner-table. When Vanity kissed Vanity, a hundred happy Junes ago, he pondered o’er her breathlessly, and, that all men might ever know, he rhymed her eyes with life and death: “Through Time I’ll save my love!” he said.	wrote poems about her eyes, connecting them to life and death, and declared, "I'll save my love forever!"

pause before his sonnet there”.	yet Beauty vanished with his breath, and, with her lovers, she was dead. —Ever his wit and not her eyes, ever his art and not her hair: “Who’d learn a trick in rhyme, be wise and pause before his sonnet there”. So all my words, however true, might sing you to a thousandth June, and no one ever know that you were Beauty for an afternoon.	think twice before writing a poem about it".

a thousandth June	—Ever his wit and not her eyes, ever his art and not her hair: “Who’d learn a trick in rhyme, be wise and pause before his sonnet there”. So all my words, however true, might sing you to a thousandth June, and no one ever know that you were Beauty for an afternoon. So he wrote one day, when he pondered how coldly we thought of the “Dark Lady of the Sonnets,” and how little we remembered her as the great man wanted her remembered.	countless Junes

were Beauty for an afternoon.	—Ever his wit and not her eyes, ever his art and not her hair: “Who’d learn a trick in rhyme, be wise and pause before his sonnet there”. So all my words, however true, might sing you to a thousandth June, and no one ever know that you were Beauty for an afternoon. So he wrote one day, when he pondered how coldly we thought of the “Dark Lady of the Sonnets,” and how little we remembered her as the great man wanted her remembered.	were beautiful for a short time.

wrote one day, when he pondered how coldly we thought of the “Dark Lady of the Sonnets,” and how little we remembered her as the great man wanted her remembered.	So all my words, however true, might sing you to a thousandth June, and no one ever know that you were Beauty for an afternoon. So he wrote one day, when he pondered how coldly we thought of the “Dark Lady of the Sonnets,” and how little we remembered her as the great man wanted her remembered. For what Shakespeare must have desired, to have been able to write with such divine despair, was that the lady should live.	wrote one day, as he thought about how little we care about the "Dark Lady of the Sonnets," and how we don't remember her the way Shakespeare wanted us to.

write with such divine despair, was that the lady should live.	So he wrote one day, when he pondered how coldly we thought of the “Dark Lady of the Sonnets,” and how little we remembered her as the great man wanted her remembered. For what Shakespeare must have desired, to have been able to write with such divine despair, was that the lady should live. and now we have no real interest in her.	write with such beautiful sadness, he wanted the lady to be remembered forever.

such divine despair	So he wrote one day, when he pondered how coldly we thought of the “Dark Lady of the Sonnets,” and how little we remembered her as the great man wanted her remembered. For what Shakespeare must have desired, to have been able to write with such divine despair, was that the lady should live. and now we have no real interest in her.	such incredibly sad feelings

only obvious, imitative rhetoric	and now we have no real interest in her. The irony of it is that if he had cared more for the poem than for the lady the sonnet would be only obvious, imitative rhetoric and no one would ever have read it after twenty years. This was the last night Amory ever saw Eleanor.	just obvious, copied words

cared more for the poem than for the lady the sonnet would be only obvious, imitative rhetoric and no one would ever have read it after twenty years.	and now we have no real interest in her. The irony of it is that if he had cared more for the poem than for the lady the sonnet would be only obvious, imitative rhetoric and no one would ever have read it after twenty years. This was the last night Amory ever saw Eleanor.	cared more about the poem than the woman, the sonnet would be unoriginal, just copying others, and no one would read it after twenty years.

leaving in the morning and they had agreed to take a long farewell trot by the cold moonlight.	This was the last night Amory ever saw Eleanor. He was leaving in the morning and they had agreed to take a long farewell trot by the cold moonlight. She wanted to talk, she said—perhaps the last time in her life that she could be rational (she meant pose with comfort).	He was leaving in the morning, and they'd decided to go for one last ride together in the cold moonlight.

the cold moonlight	This was the last night Amory ever saw Eleanor. He was leaving in the morning and they had agreed to take a long farewell trot by the cold moonlight. She wanted to talk, she said—perhaps the last time in her life that she could be rational (she meant pose with comfort).	the cold moonlight

a long farewell trot	This was the last night Amory ever saw Eleanor. He was leaving in the morning and they had agreed to take a long farewell trot by the cold moonlight. She wanted to talk, she said—perhaps the last time in her life that she could be rational (she meant pose with comfort).	a long goodbye ride

scarcely a word	She wanted to talk, she said—perhaps the last time in her life that she could be rational (she meant pose with comfort). So they had turned into the woods and rode for half an hour with scarcely a word, except when she whispered “Damn!” at a bothersome branch—whispered it as no other girl was ever able to whisper it.	hardly any words

rode for half an hour with scarcely a word, except when she whispered “Damn!”	She wanted to talk, she said—perhaps the last time in her life that she could be rational (she meant pose with comfort). So they had turned into the woods and rode for half an hour with scarcely a word, except when she whispered “Damn!” at a bothersome branch—whispered it as no other girl was ever able to whisper it.	they rode in silence for half an hour, only broken when she whispered "Damn!"

a bothersome branch	So they had turned into the woods and rode for half an hour with scarcely a word, except when she whispered “Damn!” at a bothersome branch—whispered it as no other girl was ever able to whisper it. Then they started up Harper’s Hill, walking their tired horses.	an annoying branch

whispered it as no other girl was ever able to whisper it.	So they had turned into the woods and rode for half an hour with scarcely a word, except when she whispered “Damn!” at a bothersome branch—whispered it as no other girl was ever able to whisper it. Then they started up Harper’s Hill, walking their tired horses.	whispered it in a way no other girl could.

Harper’s Hill	at a bothersome branch—whispered it as no other girl was ever able to whisper it. Then they started up Harper’s Hill, walking their tired horses. “Good Lord!	Harper's Hill

started up Harper’s Hill, walking their tired horses.	at a bothersome branch—whispered it as no other girl was ever able to whisper it. Then they started up Harper’s Hill, walking their tired horses. “Good Lord!	started walking up Harper's Hill, leading their tired horses.

lonesome than the woods.”	“Good Lord! It’s quiet here!” whispered Eleanor; “much more lonesome than the woods.” “I hate woods,” Amory said, shuddering.	more lonely than the woods.

said, shuddering.	It’s quiet here!” whispered Eleanor; “much more lonesome than the woods.” “I hate woods,” Amory said, shuddering. “Any kind of foliage or underbrush at night.	said, shuddering.

underbrush at night.	“I hate woods,” Amory said, shuddering. “Any kind of foliage or underbrush at night. Out here it’s so broad and easy on the spirit.”	bushes and plants at night.

rolling moonlight down it.”	“The long slope of a long hill.” “And the cold moon rolling moonlight down it.” “And thee and me, last and most important.”	Moonlight shining down on it.

few footsteps	“And thee and me, last and most important.” It was quiet that night—the straight road they followed up to the edge of the cliff knew few footsteps at any time. Only an occasional negro cabin, silver-gray in the rock-ribbed moonlight, broke the long line of bare ground; behind lay the black edge of the woods like a dark frosting on white cake, and ahead the sharp, high horizon.	not many people walking

edge of the cliff knew few footsteps at any time.	“And thee and me, last and most important.” It was quiet that night—the straight road they followed up to the edge of the cliff knew few footsteps at any time. Only an occasional negro cabin, silver-gray in the rock-ribbed moonlight, broke the long line of bare ground; behind lay the black edge of the woods like a dark frosting on white cake, and ahead the sharp, high horizon.	The cliff edge wasn't walked on much.

lay the black edge of the woods like a dark frosting on white cake, and ahead the sharp, high horizon.	It was quiet that night—the straight road they followed up to the edge of the cliff knew few footsteps at any time. Only an occasional negro cabin, silver-gray in the rock-ribbed moonlight, broke the long line of bare ground; behind lay the black edge of the woods like a dark frosting on white cake, and ahead the sharp, high horizon. It was much colder—so cold that it settled on them and drove all the warm nights from their minds.	the dark woods looked like frosting on a white cake, and the horizon was sharp and high in the distance.

a dark frosting	It was quiet that night—the straight road they followed up to the edge of the cliff knew few footsteps at any time. Only an occasional negro cabin, silver-gray in the rock-ribbed moonlight, broke the long line of bare ground; behind lay the black edge of the woods like a dark frosting on white cake, and ahead the sharp, high horizon. It was much colder—so cold that it settled on them and drove all the warm nights from their minds.	dark edge

the rock-ribbed moonlight	It was quiet that night—the straight road they followed up to the edge of the cliff knew few footsteps at any time. Only an occasional negro cabin, silver-gray in the rock-ribbed moonlight, broke the long line of bare ground; behind lay the black edge of the woods like a dark frosting on white cake, and ahead the sharp, high horizon. It was much colder—so cold that it settled on them and drove all the warm nights from their minds.	moonlight on the rocky ground

Only an occasional negro cabin	It was quiet that night—the straight road they followed up to the edge of the cliff knew few footsteps at any time. Only an occasional negro cabin, silver-gray in the rock-ribbed moonlight, broke the long line of bare ground; behind lay the black edge of the woods like a dark frosting on white cake, and ahead the sharp, high horizon. It was much colder—so cold that it settled on them and drove all the warm nights from their minds.	Just a few scattered black people's houses

settled on them and drove all the warm nights from their minds.	Only an occasional negro cabin, silver-gray in the rock-ribbed moonlight, broke the long line of bare ground; behind lay the black edge of the woods like a dark frosting on white cake, and ahead the sharp, high horizon. It was much colder—so cold that it settled on them and drove all the warm nights from their minds. “The end of summer,” said Eleanor softly.	froze them, making them forget the warm nights.

end of summer,” said Eleanor softly.	It was much colder—so cold that it settled on them and drove all the warm nights from their minds. “The end of summer,” said Eleanor softly. “Listen to the beat of our horses’ hoofs—‘tump-tump-tump-a-tump.’	"The end of summer," Eleanor said quietly.

beat of our horses’ hoofs—‘tump-tump-tump-a-tump.’	“The end of summer,” said Eleanor softly. “Listen to the beat of our horses’ hoofs—‘tump-tump-tump-a-tump.’ Have you ever been feverish and had all noises divide into ‘tump-tump-tump’ until you could swear eternity was divisible into so many tumps?	the sound of our horses' hooves—"thump-thump-thump-a-thump."

our horses’ hoofs—‘tump-tump-tump-a-tump	“The end of summer,” said Eleanor softly. “Listen to the beat of our horses’ hoofs—‘tump-tump-tump-a-tump.’ Have you ever been feverish and had all noises divide into ‘tump-tump-tump’ until you could swear eternity was divisible into so many tumps?	the sound of our horses' hooves—"thump-thump-thump-a-thump"

swear eternity was divisible into so many tumps?	“Listen to the beat of our horses’ hoofs—‘tump-tump-tump-a-tump.’ Have you ever been feverish and had all noises divide into ‘tump-tump-tump’ until you could swear eternity was divisible into so many tumps? That’s the way I feel—old horses go tump-tump.	swear that forever could be broken down into those sounds?

so many tumps	“Listen to the beat of our horses’ hoofs—‘tump-tump-tump-a-tump.’ Have you ever been feverish and had all noises divide into ‘tump-tump-tump’ until you could swear eternity was divisible into so many tumps? That’s the way I feel—old horses go tump-tump.	so many beats

way I feel—old horses go tump-tump.	Have you ever been feverish and had all noises divide into ‘tump-tump-tump’ until you could swear eternity was divisible into so many tumps? That’s the way I feel—old horses go tump-tump. I guess that’s the only thing that separates horses and clocks from us.	That's how I feel—like old horses walking, tump-tump.

thing that separates horses and clocks from us.	That’s the way I feel—old horses go tump-tump. I guess that’s the only thing that separates horses and clocks from us. Human beings can’t go ‘tump-tump-tump’ without going crazy.”	what makes horses and clocks different from us.

go ‘tump-tump-tump’ without going crazy.”	I guess that’s the only thing that separates horses and clocks from us. Human beings can’t go ‘tump-tump-tump’ without going crazy.” The breeze freshened and Eleanor pulled her cape around her and shivered.	do something repetitive without going crazy.

pulled her cape around her and shivered.	Human beings can’t go ‘tump-tump-tump’ without going crazy.” The breeze freshened and Eleanor pulled her cape around her and shivered. “Are you very cold?” asked Amory.	wrapped her cape around herself and shivered.

the fundamental honesty	“Are you very cold?” asked Amory. “No, I’m thinking about myself—my black old inside self, the real one, with the fundamental honesty that keeps me from being absolutely wicked by making me realize my own sins.” They were riding up close by the cliff and Amory gazed over.	basic honesty

keeps me from being absolutely wicked by making me realize my own sins.”	“Are you very cold?” asked Amory. “No, I’m thinking about myself—my black old inside self, the real one, with the fundamental honesty that keeps me from being absolutely wicked by making me realize my own sins.” They were riding up close by the cliff and Amory gazed over.	stops me from being completely evil because it makes me aware of my own wrongdoings.

close by the cliff and Amory gazed over.	“No, I’m thinking about myself—my black old inside self, the real one, with the fundamental honesty that keeps me from being absolutely wicked by making me realize my own sins.” They were riding up close by the cliff and Amory gazed over. Where the fall met the ground a hundred feet below, a black stream made a sharp line, broken by tiny glints in the swift water.	near the cliff, and Amory looked over.

tiny glints	They were riding up close by the cliff and Amory gazed over. Where the fall met the ground a hundred feet below, a black stream made a sharp line, broken by tiny glints in the swift water. “Rotten, rotten old world,” broke out Eleanor suddenly, “and the wretchedest thing of all is me—oh, why am I a girl?	small flashes of light

line, broken by tiny glints in the swift water.	They were riding up close by the cliff and Amory gazed over. Where the fall met the ground a hundred feet below, a black stream made a sharp line, broken by tiny glints in the swift water. “Rotten, rotten old world,” broke out Eleanor suddenly, “and the wretchedest thing of all is me—oh, why am I a girl?	A line with little flashes of light in the fast-moving water.

“Rotten, rotten old world	Where the fall met the ground a hundred feet below, a black stream made a sharp line, broken by tiny glints in the swift water. “Rotten, rotten old world,” broke out Eleanor suddenly, “and the wretchedest thing of all is me—oh, why am I a girl? Why am I not a stupid—?	"This old world is awful."

the wretchedest thing	Where the fall met the ground a hundred feet below, a black stream made a sharp line, broken by tiny glints in the swift water. “Rotten, rotten old world,” broke out Eleanor suddenly, “and the wretchedest thing of all is me—oh, why am I a girl? Why am I not a stupid—?	the most miserable thing

stupider than I am, not much, but some, and you can lope about and get bored and then lope somewhere else, and you can play around with girls without being involved in meshes of sentiment, and you can do anything and be justified—and here am I with the brains to do everything, yet tied to the sinking ship of future matrimony.	Why am I not a stupid—? Look at you; you’re stupider than I am, not much, but some, and you can lope about and get bored and then lope somewhere else, and you can play around with girls without being involved in meshes of sentiment, and you can do anything and be justified—and here am I with the brains to do everything, yet tied to the sinking ship of future matrimony. If I were born a hundred years from now, well and good, but now what’s in store for me—I have to marry, that goes without saying.	You're a little dumber than me, and you can wander around, get bored, go somewhere else, mess around with girls without getting emotionally attached, and do whatever you want and get away with it. Meanwhile, I'm smart enough to do anything, but I'm stuck with the doomed prospect of getting married.

future matrimony	Why am I not a stupid—? Look at you; you’re stupider than I am, not much, but some, and you can lope about and get bored and then lope somewhere else, and you can play around with girls without being involved in meshes of sentiment, and you can do anything and be justified—and here am I with the brains to do everything, yet tied to the sinking ship of future matrimony. If I were born a hundred years from now, well and good, but now what’s in store for me—I have to marry, that goes without saying.	marriage in the future

born a hundred years from now, well and good, but now what’s in store for me—I have to marry, that goes without saying.	Look at you; you’re stupider than I am, not much, but some, and you can lope about and get bored and then lope somewhere else, and you can play around with girls without being involved in meshes of sentiment, and you can do anything and be justified—and here am I with the brains to do everything, yet tied to the sinking ship of future matrimony. If I were born a hundred years from now, well and good, but now what’s in store for me—I have to marry, that goes without saying. Who?	If I were born a hundred years later, great, but now I'm stuck—I have to get married, obviously.

descend to their level and let them patronize my intellect in order to get their attention.	Who? I’m too bright for most men, and yet I have to descend to their level and let them patronize my intellect in order to get their attention. Every year that I don’t marry I’ve got less chance for a first-class man.	lower myself to their standards and let them treat me like I'm not smart so they'll notice me.

year that I don’t marry I’ve got less chance for a first-class man.	I’m too bright for most men, and yet I have to descend to their level and let them patronize my intellect in order to get their attention. Every year that I don’t marry I’ve got less chance for a first-class man. At the best I can have my choice from one or two cities and, of course, I have to marry into a dinner-coat.	Every year I'm not married, my chances of finding a great husband decrease.

marry into a dinner-coat.	Every year that I don’t marry I’ve got less chance for a first-class man. At the best I can have my choice from one or two cities and, of course, I have to marry into a dinner-coat. “Listen,” she leaned close again, “I like clever men and good-looking men, and, of course, no one cares more for personality than I do.	marry someone rich.

clever men	At the best I can have my choice from one or two cities and, of course, I have to marry into a dinner-coat. “Listen,” she leaned close again, “I like clever men and good-looking men, and, of course, no one cares more for personality than I do. Oh, just one person in fifty has any glimmer of what sex is.	smart men

person in fifty has any glimmer of what sex is.	“Listen,” she leaned close again, “I like clever men and good-looking men, and, of course, no one cares more for personality than I do. Oh, just one person in fifty has any glimmer of what sex is. I’m hipped on Freud and all that, but it’s rotten that every bit of real love in the world is ninety-nine percent passion and one little soupçon of jealousy.”	Only one in fifty people understands sex.

one little soupçon	Oh, just one person in fifty has any glimmer of what sex is. I’m hipped on Freud and all that, but it’s rotten that every bit of real love in the world is ninety-nine percent passion and one little soupçon of jealousy.” She finished as suddenly as she began.	a tiny bit

bit of real love in the world is ninety-nine percent passion and one little soupçon of jealousy.”	Oh, just one person in fifty has any glimmer of what sex is. I’m hipped on Freud and all that, but it’s rotten that every bit of real love in the world is ninety-nine percent passion and one little soupçon of jealousy.” She finished as suddenly as she began.	real love is almost all passion and just a tiny bit of jealousy.

ninety-nine percent passion	Oh, just one person in fifty has any glimmer of what sex is. I’m hipped on Freud and all that, but it’s rotten that every bit of real love in the world is ninety-nine percent passion and one little soupçon of jealousy.” She finished as suddenly as she began.	almost all desire

force that’s part of the machinery under everything.	“Of course, you’re right,” Amory agreed. “It’s a rather unpleasant overpowering force that’s part of the machinery under everything. It’s like an actor that lets you see his mechanics!	a force that runs everything.

a rather unpleasant overpowering force	“Of course, you’re right,” Amory agreed. “It’s a rather unpleasant overpowering force that’s part of the machinery under everything. It’s like an actor that lets you see his mechanics!	an unpleasant, overwhelming force

actor that lets you see his mechanics!	“It’s a rather unpleasant overpowering force that’s part of the machinery under everything. It’s like an actor that lets you see his mechanics! Wait a minute till I think this out.”	an actor you can see how they work!

remnants of romantic chivalry diluted with Victorian sentiment—and we who consider ourselves the intellectuals cover it up by pretending that it’s another side of us, has nothing to do with our shining brains; we pretend that the fact that we realize it is really absolving us from being a prey to it.	“You see everyone’s got to have some cloak to throw around it. The mediocre intellects, Plato’s second class, use the remnants of romantic chivalry diluted with Victorian sentiment—and we who consider ourselves the intellectuals cover it up by pretending that it’s another side of us, has nothing to do with our shining brains; we pretend that the fact that we realize it is really absolving us from being a prey to it. But the truth is that sex is right in the middle of our purest abstractions, so close that it obscures vision.	leftover romantic ideas mixed with Victorian feelings—and those of us who think we're intellectuals hide it by pretending it's a separate part of us, unrelated to our intelligence; we pretend that knowing about it excuses us from being controlled by it.

romantic chivalry	“You see everyone’s got to have some cloak to throw around it. The mediocre intellects, Plato’s second class, use the remnants of romantic chivalry diluted with Victorian sentiment—and we who consider ourselves the intellectuals cover it up by pretending that it’s another side of us, has nothing to do with our shining brains; we pretend that the fact that we realize it is really absolving us from being a prey to it. But the truth is that sex is right in the middle of our purest abstractions, so close that it obscures vision.	old-fashioned, idealized ideas about love and relationships

Victorian sentiment	“You see everyone’s got to have some cloak to throw around it. The mediocre intellects, Plato’s second class, use the remnants of romantic chivalry diluted with Victorian sentiment—and we who consider ourselves the intellectuals cover it up by pretending that it’s another side of us, has nothing to do with our shining brains; we pretend that the fact that we realize it is really absolving us from being a prey to it. But the truth is that sex is right in the middle of our purest abstractions, so close that it obscures vision.	Victorian emotions

The mediocre intellects	“You see everyone’s got to have some cloak to throw around it. The mediocre intellects, Plato’s second class, use the remnants of romantic chivalry diluted with Victorian sentiment—and we who consider ourselves the intellectuals cover it up by pretending that it’s another side of us, has nothing to do with our shining brains; we pretend that the fact that we realize it is really absolving us from being a prey to it. But the truth is that sex is right in the middle of our purest abstractions, so close that it obscures vision.	People with average intelligence

Plato’s second class	“You see everyone’s got to have some cloak to throw around it. The mediocre intellects, Plato’s second class, use the remnants of romantic chivalry diluted with Victorian sentiment—and we who consider ourselves the intellectuals cover it up by pretending that it’s another side of us, has nothing to do with our shining brains; we pretend that the fact that we realize it is really absolving us from being a prey to it. But the truth is that sex is right in the middle of our purest abstractions, so close that it obscures vision.	mediocre intellects

middle of our purest abstractions, so close that it obscures vision.	The mediocre intellects, Plato’s second class, use the remnants of romantic chivalry diluted with Victorian sentiment—and we who consider ourselves the intellectuals cover it up by pretending that it’s another side of us, has nothing to do with our shining brains; we pretend that the fact that we realize it is really absolving us from being a prey to it. But the truth is that sex is right in the middle of our purest abstractions, so close that it obscures vision. I can kiss you now and will.”	at the core of our most intellectual thoughts, so intertwined it clouds our judgment.

our purest abstractions	The mediocre intellects, Plato’s second class, use the remnants of romantic chivalry diluted with Victorian sentiment—and we who consider ourselves the intellectuals cover it up by pretending that it’s another side of us, has nothing to do with our shining brains; we pretend that the fact that we realize it is really absolving us from being a prey to it. But the truth is that sex is right in the middle of our purest abstractions, so close that it obscures vision. I can kiss you now and will.”	Our most intellectual thoughts.

leaned toward her in his saddle, but she drew away.	I can kiss you now and will.” He leaned toward her in his saddle, but she drew away. “I can’t—I can’t kiss you now—I’m more sensitive.”	leaned toward her while still on his horse, but she moved away.

maxims of Confucius?”	she fired up. “The Catholic Church or the maxims of Confucius?” Amory looked up, rather taken aback.	Sayings of Confucius?

looked up, rather taken aback.	“The Catholic Church or the maxims of Confucius?” Amory looked up, rather taken aback. “That’s your panacea, isn’t it?”	looked up, surprised.

just an old hypocrite	she cried. “Oh, you’re just an old hypocrite, too. Thousands of scowling priests keeping the degenerate Italians and illiterate Irish repentant with gabble-gabble about the sixth and ninth commandments.	just another hypocrite

the sixth and ninth commandments	“Oh, you’re just an old hypocrite, too. Thousands of scowling priests keeping the degenerate Italians and illiterate Irish repentant with gabble-gabble about the sixth and ninth commandments. It’s just all cloaks, sentiment and spiritual rouge and panaceas.	The commandments about adultery and lust.

the degenerate Italians	“Oh, you’re just an old hypocrite, too. Thousands of scowling priests keeping the degenerate Italians and illiterate Irish repentant with gabble-gabble about the sixth and ninth commandments. It’s just all cloaks, sentiment and spiritual rouge and panaceas.	low-class Italians

gabble about the sixth and ninth commandments.	“Oh, you’re just an old hypocrite, too. Thousands of scowling priests keeping the degenerate Italians and illiterate Irish repentant with gabble-gabble about the sixth and ninth commandments. It’s just all cloaks, sentiment and spiritual rouge and panaceas.	endless, nonsensical chatter about adultery and coveting.

scowling priests	“Oh, you’re just an old hypocrite, too. Thousands of scowling priests keeping the degenerate Italians and illiterate Irish repentant with gabble-gabble about the sixth and ninth commandments. It’s just all cloaks, sentiment and spiritual rouge and panaceas.	Frowning priests

illiterate Irish repentant	“Oh, you’re just an old hypocrite, too. Thousands of scowling priests keeping the degenerate Italians and illiterate Irish repentant with gabble-gabble about the sixth and ninth commandments. It’s just all cloaks, sentiment and spiritual rouge and panaceas.	uneducated Irish feeling sorry for their sins

just all cloaks	Thousands of scowling priests keeping the degenerate Italians and illiterate Irish repentant with gabble-gabble about the sixth and ninth commandments. It’s just all cloaks, sentiment and spiritual rouge and panaceas. I’ll tell you there is no God, not even a definite abstract goodness; so it’s all got to be worked out for the individual by the individual here in high white foreheads like mine, and you’re too much the prig to admit it.”	It's all just show.

high white foreheads	It’s just all cloaks, sentiment and spiritual rouge and panaceas. I’ll tell you there is no God, not even a definite abstract goodness; so it’s all got to be worked out for the individual by the individual here in high white foreheads like mine, and you’re too much the prig to admit it.” She let go her reins and shook her little fists at the stars.	intellectuals

worked out for the individual by the individual here in high white foreheads like mine, and you’re too much the prig to admit it.”	It’s just all cloaks, sentiment and spiritual rouge and panaceas. I’ll tell you there is no God, not even a definite abstract goodness; so it’s all got to be worked out for the individual by the individual here in high white foreheads like mine, and you’re too much the prig to admit it.” She let go her reins and shook her little fists at the stars.	figured out for yourself by yourself using your own intelligence, but you're too stuck-up to admit it.

not even a definite abstract goodness	It’s just all cloaks, sentiment and spiritual rouge and panaceas. I’ll tell you there is no God, not even a definite abstract goodness; so it’s all got to be worked out for the individual by the individual here in high white foreheads like mine, and you’re too much the prig to admit it.” She let go her reins and shook her little fists at the stars.	not even a clearly defined idea of good

shook her little fists at the stars.	I’ll tell you there is no God, not even a definite abstract goodness; so it’s all got to be worked out for the individual by the individual here in high white foreheads like mine, and you’re too much the prig to admit it.” She let go her reins and shook her little fists at the stars. “If there’s a God let him strike me—strike me!”	shook her little fists at the stars.

’s a God let him strike me—strike me!”	She let go her reins and shook her little fists at the stars. “If there’s a God let him strike me—strike me!” “Talking about God again after the manner of atheists,” Amory said sharply.	If there's a God, let him strike me down! Strike me down!

manner of atheists,” Amory said sharply.	“If there’s a God let him strike me—strike me!” “Talking about God again after the manner of atheists,” Amory said sharply. His materialism, always a thin cloak, was torn to shreds by Eleanor’s blasphemy.	Amory said sharply, "Like an atheist would."

Eleanor’s blasphemy	“Talking about God again after the manner of atheists,” Amory said sharply. His materialism, always a thin cloak, was torn to shreds by Eleanor’s blasphemy. She knew it and it angered him that she knew it.	Eleanor's disrespect toward religion.

materialism, always a thin cloak, was torn to shreds by Eleanor’s blasphemy.	“Talking about God again after the manner of atheists,” Amory said sharply. His materialism, always a thin cloak, was torn to shreds by Eleanor’s blasphemy. She knew it and it angered him that she knew it.	His belief in the physical world, never very strong, was completely destroyed by Eleanor's disrespect toward God.

always a thin cloak	“Talking about God again after the manner of atheists,” Amory said sharply. His materialism, always a thin cloak, was torn to shreds by Eleanor’s blasphemy. She knew it and it angered him that she knew it.	always easily broken

intellectuals who don’t find faith convenient,” he continued coldly, “like Napoleon and Oscar Wilde and the rest of your type, you’ll yell loudly for a priest on your deathbed.”	She knew it and it angered him that she knew it. “And like most intellectuals who don’t find faith convenient,” he continued coldly, “like Napoleon and Oscar Wilde and the rest of your type, you’ll yell loudly for a priest on your deathbed.” Eleanor drew her horse up sharply and he reined in beside her.	intellectuals who don't find religion useful," he continued coldly, "like Napoleon and Oscar Wilde and others like you, you'll desperately want a priest when you're dying.

reined in beside her.	“And like most intellectuals who don’t find faith convenient,” he continued coldly, “like Napoleon and Oscar Wilde and the rest of your type, you’ll yell loudly for a priest on your deathbed.” Eleanor drew her horse up sharply and he reined in beside her. “Will I?”	stopped his horse next to hers.

voice that scared him.	“Will I?” she said in a queer voice that scared him. “Will I?	voice that frightened him.

a queer voice	“Will I?” she said in a queer voice that scared him. “Will I?	a strange voice

turned and was riding breakneck for the end of the plateau.	I’m going over the cliff!” And before he could interfere she had turned and was riding breakneck for the end of the plateau. He wheeled and started after her, his body like ice, his nerves in a vast clangor.	turned and rode as fast as she could toward the edge of the plateau.

nerves in a vast clangor.	And before he could interfere she had turned and was riding breakneck for the end of the plateau. He wheeled and started after her, his body like ice, his nerves in a vast clangor. There was no chance of stopping her.	extremely nervous and on edge.

a vast clangor	And before he could interfere she had turned and was riding breakneck for the end of the plateau. He wheeled and started after her, his body like ice, his nerves in a vast clangor. There was no chance of stopping her.	a jangling mess

was under a cloud and her horse would step blindly over.	There was no chance of stopping her. The moon was under a cloud and her horse would step blindly over. Then some ten feet from the edge of the cliff she gave a sudden shriek and flung herself sideways—plunged from her horse and, rolling over twice, landed in a pile of brush five feet from the edge.	was hidden by a cloud, and her horse wouldn't be able to see where it was going.

edge of the cliff she gave a sudden shriek and flung herself sideways—plunged from her horse and, rolling over twice, landed in a pile of brush five feet from the edge.	The moon was under a cloud and her horse would step blindly over. Then some ten feet from the edge of the cliff she gave a sudden shriek and flung herself sideways—plunged from her horse and, rolling over twice, landed in a pile of brush five feet from the edge. The horse went over with a frantic whinny.	she suddenly shrieked, threw herself off her horse to the side, rolled twice, and landed in a pile of bushes five feet from the cliff's edge.

a sudden shriek	The moon was under a cloud and her horse would step blindly over. Then some ten feet from the edge of the cliff she gave a sudden shriek and flung herself sideways—plunged from her horse and, rolling over twice, landed in a pile of brush five feet from the edge. The horse went over with a frantic whinny.	a sudden scream

a frantic whinny	Then some ten feet from the edge of the cliff she gave a sudden shriek and flung herself sideways—plunged from her horse and, rolling over twice, landed in a pile of brush five feet from the edge. The horse went over with a frantic whinny. In a minute he was by Eleanor’s side and saw that her eyes were open.	a desperate neigh

went over with a frantic whinny.	Then some ten feet from the edge of the cliff she gave a sudden shriek and flung herself sideways—plunged from her horse and, rolling over twice, landed in a pile of brush five feet from the edge. The horse went over with a frantic whinny. In a minute he was by Eleanor’s side and saw that her eyes were open.	fell over while neighing wildly.

was by Eleanor’s side and saw that her eyes were open.	The horse went over with a frantic whinny. In a minute he was by Eleanor’s side and saw that her eyes were open. “Eleanor!”	was next to Eleanor and saw she was awake.

Eleanor’s side	The horse went over with a frantic whinny. In a minute he was by Eleanor’s side and saw that her eyes were open. “Eleanor!”	Eleanor's side

helped her gently to her feet and boosted her onto his saddle.	“I thought I was going over. I didn’t know—” He helped her gently to her feet and boosted her onto his saddle. So they started homeward; Amory walking and she bent forward on the pommel, sobbing bitterly.	helped her stand up and lifted her onto his horse.

bent forward on the pommel, sobbing bitterly.	I didn’t know—” He helped her gently to her feet and boosted her onto his saddle. So they started homeward; Amory walking and she bent forward on the pommel, sobbing bitterly. “I’ve got a crazy streak,” she faltered, “twice before I’ve done things like that.	leaning forward on the saddle horn, crying hard.

a crazy streak	So they started homeward; Amory walking and she bent forward on the pommel, sobbing bitterly. “I’ve got a crazy streak,” she faltered, “twice before I’ve done things like that. When I was eleven mother went—went mad—stark raving crazy.	a tendency to act irrationally

went mad—stark raving crazy.	“I’ve got a crazy streak,” she faltered, “twice before I’ve done things like that. When I was eleven mother went—went mad—stark raving crazy. We were in Vienna—” All the way back she talked haltingly about herself, and Amory’s love waned slowly with the moon.	went crazy—completely lost it.

Amory’s love	When I was eleven mother went—went mad—stark raving crazy. We were in Vienna—” All the way back she talked haltingly about herself, and Amory’s love waned slowly with the moon. At her door they started from habit to kiss good night, but she could not run into his arms, nor were they stretched to meet her as in the week before.	Amory's love

waned slowly with the moon.	When I was eleven mother went—went mad—stark raving crazy. We were in Vienna—” All the way back she talked haltingly about herself, and Amory’s love waned slowly with the moon. At her door they started from habit to kiss good night, but she could not run into his arms, nor were they stretched to meet her as in the week before.	decreased gradually.

run into his arms, nor were they stretched to meet her as in the week before.	We were in Vienna—” All the way back she talked haltingly about herself, and Amory’s love waned slowly with the moon. At her door they started from habit to kiss good night, but she could not run into his arms, nor were they stretched to meet her as in the week before. For a minute they stood there, hating each other with a bitter sadness.	He didn't hold her, like he had the week before.

a bitter sadness	At her door they started from habit to kiss good night, but she could not run into his arms, nor were they stretched to meet her as in the week before. For a minute they stood there, hating each other with a bitter sadness. But as Amory had loved himself in Eleanor, so now what he hated was only a mirror.	a sad bitterness

hating each other with a bitter sadness.	At her door they started from habit to kiss good night, but she could not run into his arms, nor were they stretched to meet her as in the week before. For a minute they stood there, hating each other with a bitter sadness. But as Amory had loved himself in Eleanor, so now what he hated was only a mirror.	hating each other with sad resentment.

only the little sighing gusts	Their poses were strewn about the pale dawn like broken glass. The stars were long gone and there were left only the little sighing gusts of wind and the silences between. but naked souls are poor things ever, and soon he turned homeward and let new lights come in with the sun.	just the soft whispers of wind

come in with the sun.	The stars were long gone and there were left only the little sighing gusts of wind and the silences between. but naked souls are poor things ever, and soon he turned homeward and let new lights come in with the sun.	Arrive with the sunrise.

burden of light, Bosoming day as a laughing and radiant daughter.	“Here, Earthborn, over the lilt of the water, Lisping its music and bearing a burden of light, Bosoming day as a laughing and radiant daughter. Here we may whisper unheard, unafraid of the night.	carrying the light, embracing the day like a joyful and bright daughter.

a laughing and radiant daughter	“Here, Earthborn, over the lilt of the water, Lisping its music and bearing a burden of light, Bosoming day as a laughing and radiant daughter. Here we may whisper unheard, unafraid of the night.	a happy and bright daughter

whisper unheard, unafraid of the night.	“Here, Earthborn, over the lilt of the water, Lisping its music and bearing a burden of light, Bosoming day as a laughing and radiant daughter. Here we may whisper unheard, unafraid of the night. Walking alone.	speak quietly without being heard, not afraid of the dark.

the breathless air	was it splendor, or what, we were bound with, Deep in the time when summer lets down her hair? Shadows we loved and the patterns they covered the ground with Tapestries, mystical, faint in the breathless air. That was the day.	the still air

patterns they covered the ground with Tapestries, mystical, faint in the breathless air.	was it splendor, or what, we were bound with, Deep in the time when summer lets down her hair? Shadows we loved and the patterns they covered the ground with Tapestries, mystical, faint in the breathless air. That was the day.	Patterns on the ground like faint, magical tapestries in the still air.

by who had sought for glory, Whispered to us of peace in the plaintive breeze, Whispered of old dead faiths that the day had shattered, Youth the penny that bought delight of the moon; That was the urge that we knew and the language that mattered That was the debt that we paid to the usurer June.	That was the day. and the night for another story, Pale as a dream and shadowed with pencilled trees— Ghosts of the stars came by who had sought for glory, Whispered to us of peace in the plaintive breeze, Whispered of old dead faiths that the day had shattered, Youth the penny that bought delight of the moon; That was the urge that we knew and the language that mattered That was the debt that we paid to the usurer June. Here, deepest of dreams, by the waters that bring not Anything back of the past that we need not know, What if the light is but sun and the little streams sing not, We are together, it seems.	who had chased fame, Whispered peace to us in the sad breeze, Whispered of old beliefs destroyed by the day, Youth was the price for the moon's joy; That was the desire we felt and the language that mattered, That was the price we paid to June.

the plaintive breeze	That was the day. and the night for another story, Pale as a dream and shadowed with pencilled trees— Ghosts of the stars came by who had sought for glory, Whispered to us of peace in the plaintive breeze, Whispered of old dead faiths that the day had shattered, Youth the penny that bought delight of the moon; That was the urge that we knew and the language that mattered That was the debt that we paid to the usurer June. Here, deepest of dreams, by the waters that bring not Anything back of the past that we need not know, What if the light is but sun and the little streams sing not, We are together, it seems.	the sad breeze

past that we need not know, What if the light is but sun and the little streams sing not, We are together, it seems.	and the night for another story, Pale as a dream and shadowed with pencilled trees— Ghosts of the stars came by who had sought for glory, Whispered to us of peace in the plaintive breeze, Whispered of old dead faiths that the day had shattered, Youth the penny that bought delight of the moon; That was the urge that we knew and the language that mattered That was the debt that we paid to the usurer June. Here, deepest of dreams, by the waters that bring not Anything back of the past that we need not know, What if the light is but sun and the little streams sing not, We are together, it seems. I have loved you so.	past we don't need to remember, what if the light is just sunlight and the streams aren't really singing? We're together, anyway.

the changing glade	I have loved you so. What did the last night hold, with the summer over, Drawing us back to the home in the changing glade? What leered out of the dark in the ghostly clover?	the evolving meadow

home in the changing glade?	I have loved you so. What did the last night hold, with the summer over, Drawing us back to the home in the changing glade? What leered out of the dark in the ghostly clover?	home in the changing field?

the ghostly clover	What did the last night hold, with the summer over, Drawing us back to the home in the changing glade? What leered out of the dark in the ghostly clover? God!.	ghostly clover

out of the dark in the ghostly clover?	What did the last night hold, with the summer over, Drawing us back to the home in the changing glade? What leered out of the dark in the ghostly clover? God!.	What peered from the shadows in the pale clover?

stirred in your sleep.	God!. till you stirred in your sleep. and were wild afraid.	moved in your sleep.

are chronicle now to the eerie.	we have passed. we are chronicle now to the eerie. Curious metal from meteors that failed in the sky; Earthborn the tireless is stretched by the water, quite weary, Close to this ununderstandable changeling that’s I. Fear is an echo we traced to Security’s daughter; Now we are faces and voices.	are now a story for the strange.

Close to this ununderstandable changeling that’s I. Fear is an echo we traced to Security’s daughter; Now we are faces and voices.	we are chronicle now to the eerie. Curious metal from meteors that failed in the sky; Earthborn the tireless is stretched by the water, quite weary, Close to this ununderstandable changeling that’s I. Fear is an echo we traced to Security’s daughter; Now we are faces and voices. and less, too soon, Whispering half-love over the lilt of the water.	Near this strange, incomprehensible version of myself. Fear is a remnant we linked back to a feeling of safety; Now we are just appearances and sounds.

Security’s daughter	we are chronicle now to the eerie. Curious metal from meteors that failed in the sky; Earthborn the tireless is stretched by the water, quite weary, Close to this ununderstandable changeling that’s I. Fear is an echo we traced to Security’s daughter; Now we are faces and voices. and less, too soon, Whispering half-love over the lilt of the water.	The source of fear.

this ununderstandable changeling	we are chronicle now to the eerie. Curious metal from meteors that failed in the sky; Earthborn the tireless is stretched by the water, quite weary, Close to this ununderstandable changeling that’s I. Fear is an echo we traced to Security’s daughter; Now we are faces and voices. and less, too soon, Whispering half-love over the lilt of the water.	this mysterious replacement

lilt of the water.	Curious metal from meteors that failed in the sky; Earthborn the tireless is stretched by the water, quite weary, Close to this ununderstandable changeling that’s I. Fear is an echo we traced to Security’s daughter; Now we are faces and voices. and less, too soon, Whispering half-love over the lilt of the water. Youth the penny that bought delight of the moon.”	the rhythm of the water.

and less, too soon, Whispering half-love	Curious metal from meteors that failed in the sky; Earthborn the tireless is stretched by the water, quite weary, Close to this ununderstandable changeling that’s I. Fear is an echo we traced to Security’s daughter; Now we are faces and voices. and less, too soon, Whispering half-love over the lilt of the water. Youth the penny that bought delight of the moon.”	And quickly becoming even less, whispering hesitant love.

Youth the penny that bought delight of the moon.”	and less, too soon, Whispering half-love over the lilt of the water. Youth the penny that bought delight of the moon.”	Youth is the coin that buys the joy of the moon.

far away a fading laughter	“Faint winds, and a song fading and leaves falling, Faint winds, and far away a fading laughter. And the rain and over the fields a voice calling.	distant laughter fading away

 “Faint winds	“Faint winds, and a song fading and leaves falling, Faint winds, and far away a fading laughter. And the rain and over the fields a voice calling.	Soft breezes

song fading and leaves falling, Faint winds, and far away a fading laughter.	“Faint winds, and a song fading and leaves falling, Faint winds, and far away a fading laughter. And the rain and over the fields a voice calling.	The song fades, leaves fall, faint winds blow, and distant laughter fades away.

Faint winds	“Faint winds, and a song fading and leaves falling, Faint winds, and far away a fading laughter. And the rain and over the fields a voice calling.	Soft breezes.

flutters there to waft her Sisters on.	And the rain and over the fields a voice calling. Our gray blown cloud scurries and lifts above, Slides on the sun and flutters there to waft her Sisters on. The shadow of a dove Falls on the cote, the trees are filled with wings; And down the valley through the crying trees The body of the darker storm flies; brings With its new air the breath of sunken seas And slender tenuous thunder.	hovers there to carry her companions along.

down the valley through the crying trees The body of the darker storm flies; brings With its new air the breath of sunken seas And slender tenuous thunder.	Our gray blown cloud scurries and lifts above, Slides on the sun and flutters there to waft her Sisters on. The shadow of a dove Falls on the cote, the trees are filled with wings; And down the valley through the crying trees The body of the darker storm flies; brings With its new air the breath of sunken seas And slender tenuous thunder. But I wait.	The heavy storm moves down the valley through the wind-blown trees, bringing with its fresh air the smell of the ocean and faint, distant thunder.

slender tenuous thunder	Our gray blown cloud scurries and lifts above, Slides on the sun and flutters there to waft her Sisters on. The shadow of a dove Falls on the cote, the trees are filled with wings; And down the valley through the crying trees The body of the darker storm flies; brings With its new air the breath of sunken seas And slender tenuous thunder. But I wait.	thin, weak thunder

winds that I know, and storm.	But I wait. Wait for the mists and for the blacker rain— Heavier winds that stir the veil of fate, Happier winds that pile her hair; Again They tear me, teach me, strew the heavy air Upon me, winds that I know, and storm. There was a summer every rain was rare; There was a season every wind was warm.	winds I'm familiar with, and the storm.

summer every rain was rare; There was a season every wind was warm.	Wait for the mists and for the blacker rain— Heavier winds that stir the veil of fate, Happier winds that pile her hair; Again They tear me, teach me, strew the heavy air Upon me, winds that I know, and storm. There was a summer every rain was rare; There was a season every wind was warm. And now you pass me in the mist.	There was a time when rain was scarce in summer; There was a time when every wind was warm.

pass me in the mist.	There was a summer every rain was rare; There was a season every wind was warm. And now you pass me in the mist. your hair Rain-blown about you, damp lips curved once more In that wild irony, that gay despair That made you old when we have met before; Wraithlike you drift on out before the rain, Across the fields, blown with the stemless flowers, With your old hopes, dead leaves and loves again— Dim as a dream and wan with all old hours (Whispers will creep into the growing dark.	You walk by me in the fog.

that wild irony	And now you pass me in the mist. your hair Rain-blown about you, damp lips curved once more In that wild irony, that gay despair That made you old when we have met before; Wraithlike you drift on out before the rain, Across the fields, blown with the stemless flowers, With your old hopes, dead leaves and loves again— Dim as a dream and wan with all old hours (Whispers will creep into the growing dark. Tumult will die over the trees)	that reckless sarcasm

Dim as a dream and wan with all old hours (Whispers will creep into the growing dark.	And now you pass me in the mist. your hair Rain-blown about you, damp lips curved once more In that wild irony, that gay despair That made you old when we have met before; Wraithlike you drift on out before the rain, Across the fields, blown with the stemless flowers, With your old hopes, dead leaves and loves again— Dim as a dream and wan with all old hours (Whispers will creep into the growing dark. Tumult will die over the trees)	Faint as a dream and pale with all the past (Whispers will start in the growing darkness.

that gay despair	And now you pass me in the mist. your hair Rain-blown about you, damp lips curved once more In that wild irony, that gay despair That made you old when we have met before; Wraithlike you drift on out before the rain, Across the fields, blown with the stemless flowers, With your old hopes, dead leaves and loves again— Dim as a dream and wan with all old hours (Whispers will creep into the growing dark. Tumult will die over the trees)	that happy sadness

the stemless flowers	And now you pass me in the mist. your hair Rain-blown about you, damp lips curved once more In that wild irony, that gay despair That made you old when we have met before; Wraithlike you drift on out before the rain, Across the fields, blown with the stemless flowers, With your old hopes, dead leaves and loves again— Dim as a dream and wan with all old hours (Whispers will creep into the growing dark. Tumult will die over the trees)	flowers without stems

the eerie green	Tumult will die over the trees) Now night Tears from her wetted breast the splattered blouse Of day, glides down the dreaming hills, tear-bright, To cover with her hair the eerie green. Love for the dusk.	the strange green

Tears from her wetted breast the splattered blouse Of day, glides down the dreaming hills, tear-bright, To cover with her hair the eerie green.	Tumult will die over the trees) Now night Tears from her wetted breast the splattered blouse Of day, glides down the dreaming hills, tear-bright, To cover with her hair the eerie green. Love for the dusk.	Night's tears fall from the fading day, sliding down the hills, shimmering, to darken the strange green.

the splattered blouse	Tumult will die over the trees) Now night Tears from her wetted breast the splattered blouse Of day, glides down the dreaming hills, tear-bright, To cover with her hair the eerie green. Love for the dusk.	the stained shirt

Love for the dusk.	Now night Tears from her wetted breast the splattered blouse Of day, glides down the dreaming hills, tear-bright, To cover with her hair the eerie green. Love for the dusk. Love for the glistening after; Quiet the trees to their last tops.	Love the evening.

far away a fading laughter	serene. Faint winds, and far away a fading laughter.”	distant laughter fading away

Faint winds	serene. Faint winds, and far away a fading laughter.”	Gentle breezes

paced the board walk at day’s end, lulled by the everlasting surge of changing waves, smelling the half-mournful odor of the salt breeze.	Atlantic City. Amory paced the board walk at day’s end, lulled by the everlasting surge of changing waves, smelling the half-mournful odor of the salt breeze. The sea, he thought, had treasured its memories deeper than the faithless land.	walked on the boardwalk as the day ended, soothed by the constant sound of the waves, smelling the slightly sad scent of the salty wind.

the everlasting surge	Atlantic City. Amory paced the board walk at day’s end, lulled by the everlasting surge of changing waves, smelling the half-mournful odor of the salt breeze. The sea, he thought, had treasured its memories deeper than the faithless land.	the constant flow

day’s end	Atlantic City. Amory paced the board walk at day’s end, lulled by the everlasting surge of changing waves, smelling the half-mournful odor of the salt breeze. The sea, he thought, had treasured its memories deeper than the faithless land.	end of the day

the salt breeze	Atlantic City. Amory paced the board walk at day’s end, lulled by the everlasting surge of changing waves, smelling the half-mournful odor of the salt breeze. The sea, he thought, had treasured its memories deeper than the faithless land.	the salty breeze

the half-mournful odor	Atlantic City. Amory paced the board walk at day’s end, lulled by the everlasting surge of changing waves, smelling the half-mournful odor of the salt breeze. The sea, he thought, had treasured its memories deeper than the faithless land.	the slightly sad smell

the faithless land	Amory paced the board walk at day’s end, lulled by the everlasting surge of changing waves, smelling the half-mournful odor of the salt breeze. The sea, he thought, had treasured its memories deeper than the faithless land. It seemed still to whisper of Norse galleys ploughing the water world under raven-figured flags, of the British dreadnoughts, gray bulwarks of civilization steaming up through the fog of one dark July into the North Sea.	the unreliable land

deeper than the faithless land.	Amory paced the board walk at day’s end, lulled by the everlasting surge of changing waves, smelling the half-mournful odor of the salt breeze. The sea, he thought, had treasured its memories deeper than the faithless land. It seemed still to whisper of Norse galleys ploughing the water world under raven-figured flags, of the British dreadnoughts, gray bulwarks of civilization steaming up through the fog of one dark July into the North Sea.	more deeply than the unreliable land.

raven-figured flags	The sea, he thought, had treasured its memories deeper than the faithless land. It seemed still to whisper of Norse galleys ploughing the water world under raven-figured flags, of the British dreadnoughts, gray bulwarks of civilization steaming up through the fog of one dark July into the North Sea. “Well—Amory Blaine!”	flags with raven designs

Norse galleys	The sea, he thought, had treasured its memories deeper than the faithless land. It seemed still to whisper of Norse galleys ploughing the water world under raven-figured flags, of the British dreadnoughts, gray bulwarks of civilization steaming up through the fog of one dark July into the North Sea. “Well—Amory Blaine!”	Viking ships

whisper of Norse galleys ploughing the water world under raven-figured flags, of the British dreadnoughts, gray bulwarks of civilization steaming up through the fog of one dark July into the North Sea.	The sea, he thought, had treasured its memories deeper than the faithless land. It seemed still to whisper of Norse galleys ploughing the water world under raven-figured flags, of the British dreadnoughts, gray bulwarks of civilization steaming up through the fog of one dark July into the North Sea. “Well—Amory Blaine!”	a faint echo of Viking ships sailing the ocean with flags bearing raven symbols, and of British battleships, those gray symbols of civilization, moving through the fog one dark July into the North Sea.

gray bulwarks	The sea, he thought, had treasured its memories deeper than the faithless land. It seemed still to whisper of Norse galleys ploughing the water world under raven-figured flags, of the British dreadnoughts, gray bulwarks of civilization steaming up through the fog of one dark July into the North Sea. “Well—Amory Blaine!”	Gray barriers

the British dreadnoughts	The sea, he thought, had treasured its memories deeper than the faithless land. It seemed still to whisper of Norse galleys ploughing the water world under raven-figured flags, of the British dreadnoughts, gray bulwarks of civilization steaming up through the fog of one dark July into the North Sea. “Well—Amory Blaine!”	British battleships

“Well—Amory Blaine	It seemed still to whisper of Norse galleys ploughing the water world under raven-figured flags, of the British dreadnoughts, gray bulwarks of civilization steaming up through the fog of one dark July into the North Sea. “Well—Amory Blaine!” Amory looked down into the street below.	Well—Amory Blaine!

face protruded from the driver’s seat.	Amory looked down into the street below. A low racing car had drawn to a stop and a familiar cheerful face protruded from the driver’s seat. “Come on down, goopher!”	face stuck out from the driver's seat.

the driver’s seat	Amory looked down into the street below. A low racing car had drawn to a stop and a familiar cheerful face protruded from the driver’s seat. “Come on down, goopher!”	the driver’s seat

a familiar cheerful face	Amory looked down into the street below. A low racing car had drawn to a stop and a familiar cheerful face protruded from the driver’s seat. “Come on down, goopher!”	a familiar cheerful face

Come on down, goopher!”	A low racing car had drawn to a stop and a familiar cheerful face protruded from the driver’s seat. “Come on down, goopher!” cried Alec.	Come on down, buddy!

flight of wooden steps approached the car.	cried Alec. Amory called a greeting and descending a flight of wooden steps approached the car. He and Alec had been meeting intermittently, but the barrier of Rosalind lay always between them.	walked down the wooden steps toward the car.

sorry for this; he hated to lose Alec.	He and Alec had been meeting intermittently, but the barrier of Rosalind lay always between them. He was sorry for this; he hated to lose Alec. “Mr. Blaine, this is Miss Waterson, Miss Wayne, and Mr. Tully.”	He regretted this; he didn't want to lose Alec as a friend.

some secluded nook	“How d’y do?” “Amory,” said Alec exuberantly, “if you’ll jump in we’ll take you to some secluded nook and give you a wee jolt of bourbon.” Amory considered.	some private spot

jolt of bourbon.”	“How d’y do?” “Amory,” said Alec exuberantly, “if you’ll jump in we’ll take you to some secluded nook and give you a wee jolt of bourbon.” Amory considered.	shot of bourbon.

a wee jolt	“How d’y do?” “Amory,” said Alec exuberantly, “if you’ll jump in we’ll take you to some secluded nook and give you a wee jolt of bourbon.” Amory considered.	a small shot

smile very handsomely at you.”	“That’s an idea.” “Step in—move over, Jill, and Amory will smile very handsomely at you.” Amory squeezed into the back seat beside a gaudy, vermilion-lipped blonde.	smile charmingly at you.

a gaudy, vermilion-lipped blonde	“Step in—move over, Jill, and Amory will smile very handsomely at you.” Amory squeezed into the back seat beside a gaudy, vermilion-lipped blonde. “Hello, Doug Fairbanks,” she said flippantly.	A blonde with bright red lipstick.

squeezed into the back seat beside a gaudy, vermilion-lipped blonde.	“Step in—move over, Jill, and Amory will smile very handsomely at you.” Amory squeezed into the back seat beside a gaudy, vermilion-lipped blonde. “Hello, Doug Fairbanks,” she said flippantly.	squeezed into the back seat next to a showy blonde with bright red lipstick.

“Hello, Doug Fairbanks	Amory squeezed into the back seat beside a gaudy, vermilion-lipped blonde. “Hello, Doug Fairbanks,” she said flippantly. “Walking for exercise or hunting for company?”	Hello, movie star.

Walking for exercise or hunting for company?”	“Hello, Doug Fairbanks,” she said flippantly. “Walking for exercise or hunting for company?” “I was counting the waves,” replied Amory gravely.	Exercising or looking for someone to talk to?

going in for statistics.”	“I was counting the waves,” replied Amory gravely. “I’m going in for statistics.” “Don’t kid me, Doug.”	I'm getting into statistics.

an unfrequented side street	“Don’t kid me, Doug.” When they reached an unfrequented side street Alec stopped the car among deep shadows. “What you doing down here these cold days, Amory?” he demanded, as he produced a quart of bourbon from under the fur rug.	a quiet side street

street Alec stopped the car among deep shadows.	“Don’t kid me, Doug.” When they reached an unfrequented side street Alec stopped the car among deep shadows. “What you doing down here these cold days, Amory?” he demanded, as he produced a quart of bourbon from under the fur rug.	Alec stopped the car on the street in a dark, shadowy area.

quart of bourbon from under the fur rug.	When they reached an unfrequented side street Alec stopped the car among deep shadows. “What you doing down here these cold days, Amory?” he demanded, as he produced a quart of bourbon from under the fur rug. Amory avoided the question.	bottle of bourbon from under the fur rug.

no definite reason	Amory avoided the question. Indeed, he had had no definite reason for coming to the coast. “Do you remember that party of ours, sophomore year?”	no real reason

party of ours, sophomore year?”	Indeed, he had had no definite reason for coming to the coast. “Do you remember that party of ours, sophomore year?” he asked instead.	Our party in our second year of college?

slept in the pavilions up in Asbury Park—” “Lord, Alec!	“Do I? When we slept in the pavilions up in Asbury Park—” “Lord, Alec! It’s hard to think that Jesse and Dick and Kerry are all three dead.”	slept in the tents up in Asbury Park..." "Goodness, Alec!

These dreary fall days	“Don’t talk about it. These dreary fall days depress me enough.” Jill seemed to agree.	These gloomy autumn days

between at the Ranier, and he’s got to go back to New York.	“Glad to.” “You see, Tully and I have two rooms with bath between at the Ranier, and he’s got to go back to New York. I don’t want to have to move.	at the Ranier Hotel, and he has to go back to New York.

left the car and sauntered back along the board walk to the hotel.	“You’ll find the key in the office; the rooms are in my name.” Declining further locomotion or further stimulation, Amory left the car and sauntered back along the board walk to the hotel. He was in an eddy again, a deep, lethargic gulf, without desire to work or write, love or dissipate.	got out of the car and strolled back to the hotel along the boardwalk.

further stimulation	“You’ll find the key in the office; the rooms are in my name.” Declining further locomotion or further stimulation, Amory left the car and sauntered back along the board walk to the hotel. He was in an eddy again, a deep, lethargic gulf, without desire to work or write, love or dissipate.	more excitement

further locomotion	“You’ll find the key in the office; the rooms are in my name.” Declining further locomotion or further stimulation, Amory left the car and sauntered back along the board walk to the hotel. He was in an eddy again, a deep, lethargic gulf, without desire to work or write, love or dissipate.	further movement

a deep, lethargic gulf	Declining further locomotion or further stimulation, Amory left the car and sauntered back along the board walk to the hotel. He was in an eddy again, a deep, lethargic gulf, without desire to work or write, love or dissipate. For the first time in his life he rather longed for death to roll over his generation, obliterating their petty fevers and struggles and exultations.	a deep, lazy emptiness

desire to work or write, love or dissipate.	Declining further locomotion or further stimulation, Amory left the car and sauntered back along the board walk to the hotel. He was in an eddy again, a deep, lethargic gulf, without desire to work or write, love or dissipate. For the first time in his life he rather longed for death to roll over his generation, obliterating their petty fevers and struggles and exultations.	wanting to work, write, love, or party.

time in his life he rather longed for death to roll over his generation, obliterating their petty fevers and struggles and exultations.	He was in an eddy again, a deep, lethargic gulf, without desire to work or write, love or dissipate. For the first time in his life he rather longed for death to roll over his generation, obliterating their petty fevers and struggles and exultations. His youth seemed never so vanished as now in the contrast between the utter loneliness of this visit and that riotous, joyful party of four years before.	He wished death would come and end his generation's unimportant worries, fights, and joys.

their petty fevers	He was in an eddy again, a deep, lethargic gulf, without desire to work or write, love or dissipate. For the first time in his life he rather longed for death to roll over his generation, obliterating their petty fevers and struggles and exultations. His youth seemed never so vanished as now in the contrast between the utter loneliness of this visit and that riotous, joyful party of four years before.	their insignificant excitements

that riotous, joyful party	For the first time in his life he rather longed for death to roll over his generation, obliterating their petty fevers and struggles and exultations. His youth seemed never so vanished as now in the contrast between the utter loneliness of this visit and that riotous, joyful party of four years before. Things that had been the merest commonplaces of his life then, deep sleep, the sense of beauty around him, all desire, had flown away and the gaps they left were filled only with the great listlessness of his disillusion.	that wild, happy party

the utter loneliness	For the first time in his life he rather longed for death to roll over his generation, obliterating their petty fevers and struggles and exultations. His youth seemed never so vanished as now in the contrast between the utter loneliness of this visit and that riotous, joyful party of four years before. Things that had been the merest commonplaces of his life then, deep sleep, the sense of beauty around him, all desire, had flown away and the gaps they left were filled only with the great listlessness of his disillusion.	complete isolation

loneliness of this visit and that riotous, joyful party of four years before.	For the first time in his life he rather longed for death to roll over his generation, obliterating their petty fevers and struggles and exultations. His youth seemed never so vanished as now in the contrast between the utter loneliness of this visit and that riotous, joyful party of four years before. Things that had been the merest commonplaces of his life then, deep sleep, the sense of beauty around him, all desire, had flown away and the gaps they left were filled only with the great listlessness of his disillusion.	The loneliness of this visit compared to that wild, happy party four years ago.

the great listlessness	His youth seemed never so vanished as now in the contrast between the utter loneliness of this visit and that riotous, joyful party of four years before. Things that had been the merest commonplaces of his life then, deep sleep, the sense of beauty around him, all desire, had flown away and the gaps they left were filled only with the great listlessness of his disillusion. “To hold a man a woman has to appeal to the worst in him.”	utter boredom

the merest commonplaces	His youth seemed never so vanished as now in the contrast between the utter loneliness of this visit and that riotous, joyful party of four years before. Things that had been the merest commonplaces of his life then, deep sleep, the sense of beauty around him, all desire, had flown away and the gaps they left were filled only with the great listlessness of his disillusion. “To hold a man a woman has to appeal to the worst in him.”	the simplest everyday things

sense of beauty around him, all desire, had flown away and the gaps they left were filled only with the great listlessness of his disillusion.	His youth seemed never so vanished as now in the contrast between the utter loneliness of this visit and that riotous, joyful party of four years before. Things that had been the merest commonplaces of his life then, deep sleep, the sense of beauty around him, all desire, had flown away and the gaps they left were filled only with the great listlessness of his disillusion. “To hold a man a woman has to appeal to the worst in him.”	His appreciation for beauty and all his desires were gone, replaced by the profound apathy of his disappointment.

appeal to the worst in him.”	Things that had been the merest commonplaces of his life then, deep sleep, the sense of beauty around him, all desire, had flown away and the gaps they left were filled only with the great listlessness of his disillusion. “To hold a man a woman has to appeal to the worst in him.” This sentence was the thesis of most of his bad nights, of which he felt this was to be one.	attract the worst side of him.

most of his bad nights, of which he felt this was to be one.	“To hold a man a woman has to appeal to the worst in him.” This sentence was the thesis of most of his bad nights, of which he felt this was to be one. His mind had already started to play variations on the subject.	most of his bad nights, and he thought this would be one of them.

love’s exaltation	His mind had already started to play variations on the subject. Tireless passion, fierce jealousy, longing to possess and crush—these alone were left of all his love for Rosalind; these remained to him as payment for the loss of his youth—bitter calomel under the thin sugar of love’s exaltation. In his room he undressed and wrapping himself in blankets to keep out the chill October air drowsed in an armchair by the open window.	the thrill of being in love

remained to him as payment for the loss of his youth—bitter calomel under the thin sugar of love’s exaltation.	His mind had already started to play variations on the subject. Tireless passion, fierce jealousy, longing to possess and crush—these alone were left of all his love for Rosalind; these remained to him as payment for the loss of his youth—bitter calomel under the thin sugar of love’s exaltation. In his room he undressed and wrapping himself in blankets to keep out the chill October air drowsed in an armchair by the open window.	were his bitter reward for growing older, like a harsh medicine hidden under the sweet illusion of love.

bitter calomel	His mind had already started to play variations on the subject. Tireless passion, fierce jealousy, longing to possess and crush—these alone were left of all his love for Rosalind; these remained to him as payment for the loss of his youth—bitter calomel under the thin sugar of love’s exaltation. In his room he undressed and wrapping himself in blankets to keep out the chill October air drowsed in an armchair by the open window.	bitter medicine

armchair by the open window.	Tireless passion, fierce jealousy, longing to possess and crush—these alone were left of all his love for Rosalind; these remained to him as payment for the loss of his youth—bitter calomel under the thin sugar of love’s exaltation. In his room he undressed and wrapping himself in blankets to keep out the chill October air drowsed in an armchair by the open window. He remembered a poem he had read months before: “Oh staunch old heart who toiled so long for me, I waste my years sailing along the sea—” Yet he had no sense of waste, no sense of the present hope that waste implied.	armchair next to the open window.

sailing along the sea—” Yet he had no sense of waste, no sense of the present hope that waste implied.	In his room he undressed and wrapping himself in blankets to keep out the chill October air drowsed in an armchair by the open window. He remembered a poem he had read months before: “Oh staunch old heart who toiled so long for me, I waste my years sailing along the sea—” Yet he had no sense of waste, no sense of the present hope that waste implied. He felt that life had rejected him.	sailing along the sea." But he didn't feel like he was wasting time, or that there was any hope for the future.

“Rosalind! Rosalind	He felt that life had rejected him. “Rosalind! Rosalind!” He poured the words softly into the half-darkness until she seemed to permeate the room; the wet salt breeze filled his hair with moisture, the rim of a moon seared the sky and made the curtains dim and ghostly.	Rosalind! Rosalind

poured the words softly into the half-darkness until she seemed to permeate the room; the wet salt breeze filled his hair with moisture, the rim of a moon seared the sky and made the curtains dim and ghostly.	“Rosalind! Rosalind!” He poured the words softly into the half-darkness until she seemed to permeate the room; the wet salt breeze filled his hair with moisture, the rim of a moon seared the sky and made the curtains dim and ghostly. He fell asleep.	He whispered her name in the dim light until it felt like she was everywhere; the damp, salty air made his hair wet, and the bright edge of the moon made the curtains look faint and like ghosts.

the wet salt breeze	“Rosalind! Rosalind!” He poured the words softly into the half-darkness until she seemed to permeate the room; the wet salt breeze filled his hair with moisture, the rim of a moon seared the sky and made the curtains dim and ghostly. He fell asleep.	the damp, salty wind

touched his skin to find it damp and cold.	When he awoke it was very late and quiet. The blanket had slipped partly off his shoulders and he touched his skin to find it damp and cold. Then he became aware of a tense whispering not ten feet away.	felt his skin and found it was damp and cold.

aware of a tense whispering not ten feet away.	The blanket had slipped partly off his shoulders and he touched his skin to find it damp and cold. Then he became aware of a tense whispering not ten feet away. He became rigid.	He heard tense whispers nearby, less than ten feet away.

a tense whispering	The blanket had slipped partly off his shoulders and he touched his skin to find it damp and cold. Then he became aware of a tense whispering not ten feet away. He became rigid.	tense whispering

Alec’s voice	“Don’t make a sound!” It was Alec’s voice. “Jill—do you hear me?”	Alec speaking

breathed very low, very frightened.	“Jill—do you hear me?” “Yes—” breathed very low, very frightened. They were in the bathroom.	said softly, scared.

somewhere along the corridor outside.	They were in the bathroom. Then his ears caught a louder sound from somewhere along the corridor outside. It was a mumbling of men’s voices and a repeated muffled rapping.	somewhere in the hall outside.

mumbling of men’s voices and a repeated muffled rapping.	Then his ears caught a louder sound from somewhere along the corridor outside. It was a mumbling of men’s voices and a repeated muffled rapping. Amory threw off the blankets and moved close to the bathroom door.	Men were mumbling and someone was repeatedly knocking softly.

a repeated muffled rapping	Then his ears caught a louder sound from somewhere along the corridor outside. It was a mumbling of men’s voices and a repeated muffled rapping. Amory threw off the blankets and moved close to the bathroom door.	repeated muffled knocking

men’s voices	Then his ears caught a louder sound from somewhere along the corridor outside. It was a mumbling of men’s voices and a repeated muffled rapping. Amory threw off the blankets and moved close to the bathroom door.	men's voices

close to the bathroom door.	It was a mumbling of men’s voices and a repeated muffled rapping. Amory threw off the blankets and moved close to the bathroom door. “My God!” came the girl’s voice again.	near the bathroom door.

the girl’s voice	Amory threw off the blankets and moved close to the bathroom door. “My God!” came the girl’s voice again. “You’ll have to let them in.”	the girl's voice

the vermilion-lipped girl	“Sh!” Suddenly a steady, insistent knocking began at Amory’s hall door and simultaneously out of the bathroom came Alec, followed by the vermilion-lipped girl. They were both clad in pajamas.	the girl with red lipstick

a steady, insistent knocking	“Sh!” Suddenly a steady, insistent knocking began at Amory’s hall door and simultaneously out of the bathroom came Alec, followed by the vermilion-lipped girl. They were both clad in pajamas.	a constant, persistent knocking

Amory’s hall door	“Sh!” Suddenly a steady, insistent knocking began at Amory’s hall door and simultaneously out of the bathroom came Alec, followed by the vermilion-lipped girl. They were both clad in pajamas.	Amory's apartment door

Alec, followed by the vermilion-lipped girl.	“Sh!” Suddenly a steady, insistent knocking began at Amory’s hall door and simultaneously out of the bathroom came Alec, followed by the vermilion-lipped girl. They were both clad in pajamas.	Alec, followed by the girl with the red lips.

clad in pajamas.	Suddenly a steady, insistent knocking began at Amory’s hall door and simultaneously out of the bathroom came Alec, followed by the vermilion-lipped girl. They were both clad in pajamas. “Amory!”	wearing pajamas.

an anxious whisper	“Amory!” an anxious whisper. “What’s the trouble?”	a worried whisper

God, Amory—they’re just looking for a test-case—” “Well, better let them in.”	“It’s house detectives. My God, Amory—they’re just looking for a test-case—” “Well, better let them in.” “You don’t understand.	God, Amory, they're just looking for someone to make an example of." "Well, better let them in."

the Mann Act	“You don’t understand. They can get me under the Mann Act.” The girl followed him slowly, a rather miserable, pathetic figure in the darkness.	a law about transporting people across state lines for immoral purposes

get me under the Mann Act.”	“You don’t understand. They can get me under the Mann Act.” The girl followed him slowly, a rather miserable, pathetic figure in the darkness.	get me arrested for crossing state lines with her for immoral purposes.

a rather miserable, pathetic figure	They can get me under the Mann Act.” The girl followed him slowly, a rather miserable, pathetic figure in the darkness. Amory tried to plan quickly.	sad and pitiful

get her out by this door.”	Amory tried to plan quickly. “You make a racket and let them in your room,” he suggested anxiously, “and I’ll get her out by this door.” “They’re here too, though.	get her out through this door."

registered under my own name; besides, they’d trail the auto license number.”	“No chance. I registered under my own name; besides, they’d trail the auto license number.” “Say you’re married.”	I used my real name to register, and they would trace the car's license plate.

one of the house detectives knows her.”	“Say you’re married.” “Jill says one of the house detectives knows her.” The girl had stolen to the bed and tumbled upon it; lay there listening wretchedly to the knocking which had grown gradually to a pounding.	a detective in the building knows her.

lay there listening wretchedly to the knocking which had grown gradually to a pounding.	“Jill says one of the house detectives knows her.” The girl had stolen to the bed and tumbled upon it; lay there listening wretchedly to the knocking which had grown gradually to a pounding. Then came a man’s voice, angry and imperative: “Open up or we’ll break the door in!”	She lay there miserably, listening to the knocking that had slowly turned into pounding.

a man’s voice	The girl had stolen to the bed and tumbled upon it; lay there listening wretchedly to the knocking which had grown gradually to a pounding. Then came a man’s voice, angry and imperative: “Open up or we’ll break the door in!” In the silence when this voice ceased Amory realized that there were other things in the room besides people.	a man's voice

In the silence when this voice ceased Amory realized that there were other things in the room besides people.	Then came a man’s voice, angry and imperative: “Open up or we’ll break the door in!” In the silence when this voice ceased Amory realized that there were other things in the room besides people. over and around the figure crouched on the bed there hung an aura, gossamer as a moonbeam, tainted as stale, weak wine, yet a horror, diffusively brooding already over the three of them.	When the voice stopped, Amory realized there was more in the room than just people.

stale, weak wine	In the silence when this voice ceased Amory realized that there were other things in the room besides people. over and around the figure crouched on the bed there hung an aura, gossamer as a moonbeam, tainted as stale, weak wine, yet a horror, diffusively brooding already over the three of them. and over by the window among the stirring curtains stood something else, featureless and indistinguishable, yet strangely familiar.	old, bad wine

the stirring curtains	over and around the figure crouched on the bed there hung an aura, gossamer as a moonbeam, tainted as stale, weak wine, yet a horror, diffusively brooding already over the three of them. and over by the window among the stirring curtains stood something else, featureless and indistinguishable, yet strangely familiar. Simultaneously two great cases presented themselves side by side to Amory; all that took place in his mind, then, occupied in actual time less than ten seconds.	moving curtains

window among the stirring curtains stood something else, featureless and indistinguishable, yet strangely familiar.	over and around the figure crouched on the bed there hung an aura, gossamer as a moonbeam, tainted as stale, weak wine, yet a horror, diffusively brooding already over the three of them. and over by the window among the stirring curtains stood something else, featureless and indistinguishable, yet strangely familiar. Simultaneously two great cases presented themselves side by side to Amory; all that took place in his mind, then, occupied in actual time less than ten seconds.	Near the window, among the moving curtains, was something else, without any clear shape and impossible to identify, but somehow familiar.

took place in his mind, then, occupied in actual time less than ten seconds.	and over by the window among the stirring curtains stood something else, featureless and indistinguishable, yet strangely familiar. Simultaneously two great cases presented themselves side by side to Amory; all that took place in his mind, then, occupied in actual time less than ten seconds. The first fact that flashed radiantly on his comprehension was the great impersonality of sacrifice—he perceived that what we call love and hate, reward and punishment, had no more to do with it than the date of the month.	happened in his mind in less than ten seconds.

the great impersonality	Simultaneously two great cases presented themselves side by side to Amory; all that took place in his mind, then, occupied in actual time less than ten seconds. The first fact that flashed radiantly on his comprehension was the great impersonality of sacrifice—he perceived that what we call love and hate, reward and punishment, had no more to do with it than the date of the month. He quickly recapitulated the story of a sacrifice he had heard of in college: a man had cheated in an examination; his roommate in a gust of sentiment had taken the entire blame—due to the shame of it the innocent one’s entire future seemed shrouded in regret and failure, capped by the ingratitude of the real culprit.	the lack of personal feeling

more to do with it than the date of the month.	Simultaneously two great cases presented themselves side by side to Amory; all that took place in his mind, then, occupied in actual time less than ten seconds. The first fact that flashed radiantly on his comprehension was the great impersonality of sacrifice—he perceived that what we call love and hate, reward and punishment, had no more to do with it than the date of the month. He quickly recapitulated the story of a sacrifice he had heard of in college: a man had cheated in an examination; his roommate in a gust of sentiment had taken the entire blame—due to the shame of it the innocent one’s entire future seemed shrouded in regret and failure, capped by the ingratitude of the real culprit.	were as irrelevant as the date.

the innocent one’s entire future	The first fact that flashed radiantly on his comprehension was the great impersonality of sacrifice—he perceived that what we call love and hate, reward and punishment, had no more to do with it than the date of the month. He quickly recapitulated the story of a sacrifice he had heard of in college: a man had cheated in an examination; his roommate in a gust of sentiment had taken the entire blame—due to the shame of it the innocent one’s entire future seemed shrouded in regret and failure, capped by the ingratitude of the real culprit. He had finally taken his own life—years afterward the facts had come out.	the innocent person's whole future

roommate in a gust of sentiment had taken the entire blame—due to the shame of it the innocent one’s entire future seemed shrouded in regret and failure, capped by the ingratitude of the real culprit.	The first fact that flashed radiantly on his comprehension was the great impersonality of sacrifice—he perceived that what we call love and hate, reward and punishment, had no more to do with it than the date of the month. He quickly recapitulated the story of a sacrifice he had heard of in college: a man had cheated in an examination; his roommate in a gust of sentiment had taken the entire blame—due to the shame of it the innocent one’s entire future seemed shrouded in regret and failure, capped by the ingratitude of the real culprit. He had finally taken his own life—years afterward the facts had come out.	his roommate, in a moment of strong emotion, had taken all the blame. Because of the shame, the innocent roommate's future seemed full of regret and failure, made worse by the real cheater's lack of gratitude.

the real culprit	The first fact that flashed radiantly on his comprehension was the great impersonality of sacrifice—he perceived that what we call love and hate, reward and punishment, had no more to do with it than the date of the month. He quickly recapitulated the story of a sacrifice he had heard of in college: a man had cheated in an examination; his roommate in a gust of sentiment had taken the entire blame—due to the shame of it the innocent one’s entire future seemed shrouded in regret and failure, capped by the ingratitude of the real culprit. He had finally taken his own life—years afterward the facts had come out.	the actual guilty person

had both puzzled and worried Amory.	He had finally taken his own life—years afterward the facts had come out. At the time the story had both puzzled and worried Amory. Now he realized the truth; that sacrifice was no purchase of freedom.	had confused and concerned Amory.

carrying with it not a guarantee but a responsibility, not a security but an infinite risk.	Now he realized the truth; that sacrifice was no purchase of freedom. It was like a great elective office, it was like an inheritance of power—to certain people at certain times an essential luxury, carrying with it not a guarantee but a responsibility, not a security but an infinite risk. Its very momentum might drag him down to ruin—the passing of the emotional wave that made it possible might leave the one who made it high and dry forever on an island of despair.	It came with responsibility, not a guarantee, and endless risk, not safety.

a great elective office	Now he realized the truth; that sacrifice was no purchase of freedom. It was like a great elective office, it was like an inheritance of power—to certain people at certain times an essential luxury, carrying with it not a guarantee but a responsibility, not a security but an infinite risk. Its very momentum might drag him down to ruin—the passing of the emotional wave that made it possible might leave the one who made it high and dry forever on an island of despair.	a powerful position you choose

one who made it high and dry forever on an island of despair.	It was like a great elective office, it was like an inheritance of power—to certain people at certain times an essential luxury, carrying with it not a guarantee but a responsibility, not a security but an infinite risk. Its very momentum might drag him down to ruin—the passing of the emotional wave that made it possible might leave the one who made it high and dry forever on an island of despair. Amory knew that afterward Alec would secretly hate him for having done so much for him.	someone who achieved it stranded and miserable forever.

hate him for having done so much for him.	Its very momentum might drag him down to ruin—the passing of the emotional wave that made it possible might leave the one who made it high and dry forever on an island of despair. Amory knew that afterward Alec would secretly hate him for having done so much for him. All this was flung before Amory like an opened scroll, while ulterior to him and speculating upon him were those two breathless, listening forces: the gossamer aura that hung over and about the girl and that familiar thing by the window.	hate him for helping him so much.

those two breathless, listening forces	Amory knew that afterward Alec would secretly hate him for having done so much for him. All this was flung before Amory like an opened scroll, while ulterior to him and speculating upon him were those two breathless, listening forces: the gossamer aura that hung over and about the girl and that familiar thing by the window. Sacrifice by its very nature was arrogant and impersonal; sacrifice should be eternally supercilious.	those two silent, watchful presences

the gossamer aura	Amory knew that afterward Alec would secretly hate him for having done so much for him. All this was flung before Amory like an opened scroll, while ulterior to him and speculating upon him were those two breathless, listening forces: the gossamer aura that hung over and about the girl and that familiar thing by the window. Sacrifice by its very nature was arrogant and impersonal; sacrifice should be eternally supercilious.	the delicate feeling

Sacrifice by its very nature was arrogant and impersonal; sacrifice should be eternally supercilious.	All this was flung before Amory like an opened scroll, while ulterior to him and speculating upon him were those two breathless, listening forces: the gossamer aura that hung over and about the girl and that familiar thing by the window. Sacrifice by its very nature was arrogant and impersonal; sacrifice should be eternally supercilious. Weep not for me but for thy children.	Sacrifice is naturally arrogant and uncaring; it should always be superior.

Weep not for me but for thy children.	Sacrifice by its very nature was arrogant and impersonal; sacrifice should be eternally supercilious. Weep not for me but for thy children. That—thought Amory—would be somehow the way God would talk to me.	Don't cry for me, cry for your children.

surge of joy and then like a face in a motion-picture the aura over the bed faded out; the dynamic shadow by the window, that was as near as he could name it, remained for the fraction of a moment and then the breeze seemed to lift it swiftly out of the room.	That—thought Amory—would be somehow the way God would talk to me. Amory felt a sudden surge of joy and then like a face in a motion-picture the aura over the bed faded out; the dynamic shadow by the window, that was as near as he could name it, remained for the fraction of a moment and then the breeze seemed to lift it swiftly out of the room. He clinched his hands in quick ecstatic excitement.	a rush of joy, and then the glow above the bed disappeared quickly, like a face in a movie. The strange shadow by the window, the closest he could get to describing it, stayed for a split second before the breeze seemed to carry it out of the room.

clinched his hands in quick ecstatic excitement.	Amory felt a sudden surge of joy and then like a face in a motion-picture the aura over the bed faded out; the dynamic shadow by the window, that was as near as he could name it, remained for the fraction of a moment and then the breeze seemed to lift it swiftly out of the room. He clinched his hands in quick ecstatic excitement. the ten seconds were up.	He squeezed his hands shut, thrilled and excited.

quick ecstatic excitement	Amory felt a sudden surge of joy and then like a face in a motion-picture the aura over the bed faded out; the dynamic shadow by the window, that was as near as he could name it, remained for the fraction of a moment and then the breeze seemed to lift it swiftly out of the room. He clinched his hands in quick ecstatic excitement. the ten seconds were up.	sudden, joyful thrill

tableau of anguish.	Do you understand?” Alec looked at him dumbly—his face a tableau of anguish. “You have a family,” continued Amory slowly.	a picture of pain.

left Amory’s.	“I hear you.” The voice was curiously strained, the eyes never for a second left Amory’s. “Alec, you’re going to lie down here.	never looked away from Amory.

was another moment while they stared at each other.	You do what I say—if you don’t I’ll probably kill you.” There was another moment while they stared at each other. Then Amory went briskly to the bureau and, taking his pocketbook, beckoned peremptorily to the girl.	They stared at each other for a moment.

beckoned peremptorily to the girl.	There was another moment while they stared at each other. Then Amory went briskly to the bureau and, taking his pocketbook, beckoned peremptorily to the girl. He heard one word from Alec that sounded like “penitentiary,” then he and Jill were in the bathroom with the door bolted behind them.	signaled the girl urgently.

were in the bathroom with the door bolted behind them.	Then Amory went briskly to the bureau and, taking his pocketbook, beckoned peremptorily to the girl. He heard one word from Alec that sounded like “penitentiary,” then he and Jill were in the bathroom with the door bolted behind them. “You’re here with me,” he said sternly.	were in the bathroom and had locked the door.

here with me,” he said sternly.	He heard one word from Alec that sounded like “penitentiary,” then he and Jill were in the bathroom with the door bolted behind them. “You’re here with me,” he said sternly. “You’ve been with me all evening.”	"You're staying with me," he said firmly.

a burly man	“Well?” The leader of the trio nodded authoritatively at a burly man in a check suit. “All right, Olson.”	a big man

man in a check suit.	“Well?” The leader of the trio nodded authoritatively at a burly man in a check suit. “All right, Olson.”	man in a checkered suit.

“All right, Olson	The leader of the trio nodded authoritatively at a burly man in a check suit. “All right, Olson.” “I got you, Mr. O’May,” said Olson, nodding.	Okay, Olson.

said Olson, nodding.	“All right, Olson.” “I got you, Mr. O’May,” said Olson, nodding. The other two took a curious glance at their quarry and then withdrew, closing the door angrily behind them.	Olson said, nodding.

withdrew, closing the door angrily behind them.	“I got you, Mr. O’May,” said Olson, nodding. The other two took a curious glance at their quarry and then withdrew, closing the door angrily behind them. The burly man regarded Amory contemptuously.	left, slamming the door behind them.

The burly man	The other two took a curious glance at their quarry and then withdrew, closing the door angrily behind them. The burly man regarded Amory contemptuously. “Didn’t you ever hear of the Mann Act?	The big man

the Mann Act	The burly man regarded Amory contemptuously. “Didn’t you ever hear of the Mann Act? Coming down here with her,” he indicated the girl with his thumb, “with a New York license on your car—to a hotel like this.”	the law against transporting someone across state lines for immoral purposes

hear of the Mann Act?	The burly man regarded Amory contemptuously. “Didn’t you ever hear of the Mann Act? Coming down here with her,” he indicated the girl with his thumb, “with a New York license on your car—to a hotel like this.”	Ever heard of the Mann Act?

here with her,” he indicated the girl with his thumb, “with a New York license on your car—to a hotel like this.”	“Didn’t you ever hear of the Mann Act? Coming down here with her,” he indicated the girl with his thumb, “with a New York license on your car—to a hotel like this.” He shook his head implying that he had struggled over Amory but now gave him up.	bringing her here," he pointed to the girl with his thumb, "with New York license plates on your car—to a hotel like this."

shook his head implying that he had struggled over Amory but now gave him up.	Coming down here with her,” he indicated the girl with his thumb, “with a New York license on your car—to a hotel like this.” He shook his head implying that he had struggled over Amory but now gave him up. “Well,” said Amory rather impatiently, “what do you want us to do?”	He shook his head, suggesting he'd tried to figure Amory out but now gave up.

such a racket	“Well,” said Amory rather impatiently, “what do you want us to do?” “Get dressed, quick—and tell your friend not to make such a racket.” Jill was sobbing noisily on the bed, but at these words she subsided sulkily and, gathering up her clothes, retired to the bathroom.	so much noise

retired to the bathroom.	“Get dressed, quick—and tell your friend not to make such a racket.” Jill was sobbing noisily on the bed, but at these words she subsided sulkily and, gathering up her clothes, retired to the bathroom. As Amory slipped into Alec’s B.V.D.s he found that his attitude toward the situation was agreeably humorous.	went to the bathroom.

Alec’s B.V.D.s	Jill was sobbing noisily on the bed, but at these words she subsided sulkily and, gathering up her clothes, retired to the bathroom. As Amory slipped into Alec’s B.V.D.s he found that his attitude toward the situation was agreeably humorous. The aggrieved virtue of the burly man made him want to laugh.	Alec's underwear

slipped into Alec’s B.V.D.s he found that his attitude toward the situation was agreeably humorous.	Jill was sobbing noisily on the bed, but at these words she subsided sulkily and, gathering up her clothes, retired to the bathroom. As Amory slipped into Alec’s B.V.D.s he found that his attitude toward the situation was agreeably humorous. The aggrieved virtue of the burly man made him want to laugh.	put on Alec's underwear, he found he could laugh about the whole thing.

the burly man	As Amory slipped into Alec’s B.V.D.s he found that his attitude toward the situation was agreeably humorous. The aggrieved virtue of the burly man made him want to laugh. “Anybody else here?” demanded Olson, trying to look keen and ferret-like.	the muscular man

virtue of the burly man made him want to laugh.	As Amory slipped into Alec’s B.V.D.s he found that his attitude toward the situation was agreeably humorous. The aggrieved virtue of the burly man made him want to laugh. “Anybody else here?” demanded Olson, trying to look keen and ferret-like.	the big man's offended sense of morality amused him.

The aggrieved virtue	As Amory slipped into Alec’s B.V.D.s he found that his attitude toward the situation was agreeably humorous. The aggrieved virtue of the burly man made him want to laugh. “Anybody else here?” demanded Olson, trying to look keen and ferret-like.	Offended morality.

demanded Olson, trying to look keen and ferret-like.	The aggrieved virtue of the burly man made him want to laugh. “Anybody else here?” demanded Olson, trying to look keen and ferret-like. “Fellow who had the rooms,” said Amory carelessly.	Olson asked, trying to look sharp and observant.

Fellow who had the rooms,” said Amory carelessly.	“Anybody else here?” demanded Olson, trying to look keen and ferret-like. “Fellow who had the rooms,” said Amory carelessly. “He’s drunk as an owl, though.	"The guy who lives here," Amory said, not really caring.

drunk as an owl, though.	“Fellow who had the rooms,” said Amory carelessly. “He’s drunk as an owl, though. Been in there asleep since six o’clock.”	though, he's really drunk.

six o’clock	“He’s drunk as an owl, though. Been in there asleep since six o’clock.” “I’ll take a look at him presently.”	6 PM.

Been in there asleep since six o’clock.”	“He’s drunk as an owl, though. Been in there asleep since six o’clock.” “I’ll take a look at him presently.”	He's been asleep in there since six o'clock.

go upstairs with this woman.”	“How did you find out?” asked Amory curiously. “Night clerk saw you go upstairs with this woman.” Amory nodded; Jill reappeared from the bathroom, completely if rather untidily arrayed.	went up with this woman.

reappeared from the bathroom, completely if rather untidily arrayed.	“Night clerk saw you go upstairs with this woman.” Amory nodded; Jill reappeared from the bathroom, completely if rather untidily arrayed. “Now then,” began Olson, producing a notebook, “I want your real names—no damn John Smith or Mary Brown.”	came back from the bathroom, fully but somewhat messily dressed.

that big-bully stuff	“Wait a minute,” said Amory quietly. “Just drop that big-bully stuff. We merely got caught, that’s all.”	that tough guy act

glared at him.	We merely got caught, that’s all.” Olson glared at him. “Name?”	glared at him.

ease up on the nursery rhymes.	“And the lady?” “Miss Jill—” “Say,” cried Olson indignantly, “just ease up on the nursery rhymes. What’s your name?	Stop talking in children's stories.

her tear-stained face	“Oh, my God!” cried the girl cupping her tear-stained face in her hands. “I don’t want my mother to know.	face stained with tears

cupping her tear-stained face in her hands.	“Oh, my God!” cried the girl cupping her tear-stained face in her hands. “I don’t want my mother to know.	holding her tear-stained face in her hands.

cried Amory at Olson.	“Shut up!” cried Amory at Olson. An instant’s pause.	Amory shouted at Olson.

An instant’s pause	cried Amory at Olson. An instant’s pause. “Stella Robbins,” she faltered finally.	A brief silence

Delivery, Rugway, New Hampshire.”	“Stella Robbins,” she faltered finally. “General Delivery, Rugway, New Hampshire.” Olson snapped his notebook shut and looked at them very ponderously.	Delivery, Rugway, New Hampshire.

looked at them very ponderously.	“General Delivery, Rugway, New Hampshire.” Olson snapped his notebook shut and looked at them very ponderously. “By rights the hotel could turn the evidence over to the police and you’d go to penitentiary, you would, for bringin’ a girl from one State to ’nother f’r immoral purp’ses—” He paused to let the majesty of his words sink in.	looked at them thoughtfully.

over to the police and you’d go to penitentiary, you would, for bringin’ a girl from one State to ’nother f’r immoral purp’ses—” He paused to let the majesty of his words sink in.	Olson snapped his notebook shut and looked at them very ponderously. “By rights the hotel could turn the evidence over to the police and you’d go to penitentiary, you would, for bringin’ a girl from one State to ’nother f’r immoral purp’ses—” He paused to let the majesty of his words sink in. “But—the hotel is going to let you off.”	to the police and you'd go to prison for taking a girl across state lines for immoral purposes.

immoral purp’ses	Olson snapped his notebook shut and looked at them very ponderously. “By rights the hotel could turn the evidence over to the police and you’d go to penitentiary, you would, for bringin’ a girl from one State to ’nother f’r immoral purp’ses—” He paused to let the majesty of his words sink in. “But—the hotel is going to let you off.”	immoral purposes

get in the papers,” cried Jill fiercely.	“But—the hotel is going to let you off.” “It doesn’t want to get in the papers,” cried Jill fiercely. “Let us off!	get in the newspapers," Jill exclaimed angrily.

A great lightness	Huh!” A great lightness surrounded Amory. He realized that he was safe and only then did he appreciate the full enormity of what he might have incurred.	A feeling of relief.

enormity of what he might have incurred.	A great lightness surrounded Amory. He realized that he was safe and only then did he appreciate the full enormity of what he might have incurred. “However,” continued Olson, “there’s a protective association among the hotels.	how much trouble he could have been in.

the full enormity	A great lightness surrounded Amory. He realized that he was safe and only then did he appreciate the full enormity of what he might have incurred. “However,” continued Olson, “there’s a protective association among the hotels.	the full extent

much of this stuff, and we got a ’rangement with the newspapers so that you get a little free publicity.	“However,” continued Olson, “there’s a protective association among the hotels. There’s been too much of this stuff, and we got a ’rangement with the newspapers so that you get a little free publicity. Not the name of the hotel, but just a line sayin’ that you had a little trouble in ’lantic City.	too many incidents like this, so we have an agreement with the newspapers to get you some free publicity.

a ’rangement	“However,” continued Olson, “there’s a protective association among the hotels. There’s been too much of this stuff, and we got a ’rangement with the newspapers so that you get a little free publicity. Not the name of the hotel, but just a line sayin’ that you had a little trouble in ’lantic City.	an arrangement

trouble in ’lantic City.	There’s been too much of this stuff, and we got a ’rangement with the newspapers so that you get a little free publicity. Not the name of the hotel, but just a line sayin’ that you had a little trouble in ’lantic City. See?”	trouble in Atlantic City.

gettin’ off light—damn light—but—” “Come on,” said Amory briskly.	“I see.” “You’re gettin’ off light—damn light—but—” “Come on,” said Amory briskly. “Let’s get out of here.	getting off easy—too easy—but—” “Come on,” said Amory quickly.

Alec’s still form	We don’t need a valedictory.” Olson walked through the bathroom and took a cursory glance at Alec’s still form. Then he extinguished the lights and motioned them to follow him.	Alec's motionless body

took a cursory glance at Alec’s still form.	We don’t need a valedictory.” Olson walked through the bathroom and took a cursory glance at Alec’s still form. Then he extinguished the lights and motioned them to follow him.	quickly glanced at Alec, who was still lying there.

a cursory glance	We don’t need a valedictory.” Olson walked through the bathroom and took a cursory glance at Alec’s still form. Then he extinguished the lights and motioned them to follow him.	a quick look

considered a piece of bravado—yielded finally.	Then he extinguished the lights and motioned them to follow him. As they walked into the elevator Amory considered a piece of bravado—yielded finally. He reached out and tapped Olson on the arm.	thought about doing something daring, but then decided against it.

tapped Olson on the arm.	As they walked into the elevator Amory considered a piece of bravado—yielded finally. He reached out and tapped Olson on the arm. “Would you mind taking off your hat?	touched Olson's arm.

lady in the elevator.”	“Would you mind taking off your hat? There’s a lady in the elevator.” Olson’s hat came off slowly.	lady in the elevator.

Olson’s hat	There’s a lady in the elevator.” Olson’s hat came off slowly. There was a rather embarrassing two minutes under the lights of the lobby while the night clerk and a few belated guests stared at them curiously; the loudly dressed girl with bent head, the handsome young man with his chin several points aloft; the inference was quite obvious.	Olson took off his hat.

the handsome young man	Olson’s hat came off slowly. There was a rather embarrassing two minutes under the lights of the lobby while the night clerk and a few belated guests stared at them curiously; the loudly dressed girl with bent head, the handsome young man with his chin several points aloft; the inference was quite obvious. Then the chill outdoors—where the salt air was fresher and keener still with the first hints of morning.	the handsome young man

clerk and a few belated guests stared at them curiously; the loudly dressed girl with bent head, the handsome young man with his chin several points aloft; the inference was quite obvious.	Olson’s hat came off slowly. There was a rather embarrassing two minutes under the lights of the lobby while the night clerk and a few belated guests stared at them curiously; the loudly dressed girl with bent head, the handsome young man with his chin several points aloft; the inference was quite obvious. Then the chill outdoors—where the salt air was fresher and keener still with the first hints of morning.	the clerk and some late guests stared at them, curious. The girl with the bright clothes had her head down, and the handsome young man held his chin high. What was happening was pretty clear.

a rather embarrassing two minutes	Olson’s hat came off slowly. There was a rather embarrassing two minutes under the lights of the lobby while the night clerk and a few belated guests stared at them curiously; the loudly dressed girl with bent head, the handsome young man with his chin several points aloft; the inference was quite obvious. Then the chill outdoors—where the salt air was fresher and keener still with the first hints of morning.	an awkward two minutes

a few belated guests	Olson’s hat came off slowly. There was a rather embarrassing two minutes under the lights of the lobby while the night clerk and a few belated guests stared at them curiously; the loudly dressed girl with bent head, the handsome young man with his chin several points aloft; the inference was quite obvious. Then the chill outdoors—where the salt air was fresher and keener still with the first hints of morning.	a few guests who were late

the loudly dressed girl	Olson’s hat came off slowly. There was a rather embarrassing two minutes under the lights of the lobby while the night clerk and a few belated guests stared at them curiously; the loudly dressed girl with bent head, the handsome young man with his chin several points aloft; the inference was quite obvious. Then the chill outdoors—where the salt air was fresher and keener still with the first hints of morning.	the girl with the flashy clothes

machines whose drivers were presumably asleep inside.	Then the chill outdoors—where the salt air was fresher and keener still with the first hints of morning. “You can get one of those taxis and beat it,” said Olson, pointing to the blurred outline of two machines whose drivers were presumably asleep inside. “Goodbye,” said Olson.	cars where the drivers were probably asleep.

the blurred outline	Then the chill outdoors—where the salt air was fresher and keener still with the first hints of morning. “You can get one of those taxis and beat it,” said Olson, pointing to the blurred outline of two machines whose drivers were presumably asleep inside. “Goodbye,” said Olson.	the blurry shape

the girl’s arm	“Goodbye,” said Olson. He reached in his pocket suggestively, but Amory snorted, and, taking the girl’s arm, turned away. “Where did you tell the driver to go?”	the girl's arm

asked as they whirled along the dim street.	“Where did you tell the driver to go?” she asked as they whirled along the dim street. “The station.”	asked as they drove quickly down the dark street.

know about this—except our friends and enemies.”	“If that guy writes my mother—” “He won’t. Nobody’ll ever know about this—except our friends and enemies.” Dawn was breaking over the sea.	know about this—only our friends and enemies will."

said with a cheerful laugh.	“It does very well,” agreed Amory critically, and then as an afterthought: “It’s almost breakfast-time—do you want something to eat?” “Food—” she said with a cheerful laugh. “Food is what queered the party.	said with a cheerful laugh.

a cheerful laugh	“It does very well,” agreed Amory critically, and then as an afterthought: “It’s almost breakfast-time—do you want something to eat?” “Food—” she said with a cheerful laugh. “Food is what queered the party.	a happy laugh

a big supper	“Food is what queered the party. We ordered a big supper to be sent up to the room about two o’clock. Alec didn’t give the waiter a tip, so I guess the little bastard snitched.”	a large meal

sent up to the room about two o’clock.	“Food is what queered the party. We ordered a big supper to be sent up to the room about two o’clock. Alec didn’t give the waiter a tip, so I guess the little bastard snitched.”	delivered to the room around two o'clock.

about two o’clock	“Food is what queered the party. We ordered a big supper to be sent up to the room about two o’clock. Alec didn’t give the waiter a tip, so I guess the little bastard snitched.”	around two o'clock

the little bastard	We ordered a big supper to be sent up to the room about two o’clock. Alec didn’t give the waiter a tip, so I guess the little bastard snitched.” Jill’s low spirits seemed to have gone faster than the scattering night.	the little jerk

Jill’s low spirits	Alec didn’t give the waiter a tip, so I guess the little bastard snitched.” Jill’s low spirits seemed to have gone faster than the scattering night. “Let me tell you,” she said emphatically, “when you want to stage that sorta party stay away from liquor, and when you want to get tight stay away from bedrooms.”	Jill's bad mood

the scattering night	Alec didn’t give the waiter a tip, so I guess the little bastard snitched.” Jill’s low spirits seemed to have gone faster than the scattering night. “Let me tell you,” she said emphatically, “when you want to stage that sorta party stay away from liquor, and when you want to get tight stay away from bedrooms.”	the fading night

faster than the scattering night.	Alec didn’t give the waiter a tip, so I guess the little bastard snitched.” Jill’s low spirits seemed to have gone faster than the scattering night. “Let me tell you,” she said emphatically, “when you want to stage that sorta party stay away from liquor, and when you want to get tight stay away from bedrooms.”	faster than the night disappearing.

away from liquor, and when you want to get tight stay away from bedrooms.”	Jill’s low spirits seemed to have gone faster than the scattering night. “Let me tell you,” she said emphatically, “when you want to stage that sorta party stay away from liquor, and when you want to get tight stay away from bedrooms.” “I’ll remember.”	Stay away from alcohol, and if you want to get drunk, stay out of the bedrooms.

tapped suddenly at the glass and they drew up at the door of an all-night restaurant.	“I’ll remember.” He tapped suddenly at the glass and they drew up at the door of an all-night restaurant. “Is Alec a great friend of yours?” asked Jill as they perched themselves on high stools inside, and set their elbows on the dingy counter.	He knocked on the window, and they stopped at the all-night restaurant.

friend of yours?” asked Jill as they perched themselves on high stools inside, and set their elbows on the dingy counter.	He tapped suddenly at the glass and they drew up at the door of an all-night restaurant. “Is Alec a great friend of yours?” asked Jill as they perched themselves on high stools inside, and set their elbows on the dingy counter. “He used to be.	friend of yours?" Jill asked as they sat on stools and leaned on the dirty counter.

high stools	He tapped suddenly at the glass and they drew up at the door of an all-night restaurant. “Is Alec a great friend of yours?” asked Jill as they perched themselves on high stools inside, and set their elbows on the dingy counter. “He used to be.	high stools

the dingy counter	He tapped suddenly at the glass and they drew up at the door of an all-night restaurant. “Is Alec a great friend of yours?” asked Jill as they perched themselves on high stools inside, and set their elbows on the dingy counter. “He used to be.	the grimy counter

back in New York Amory found in a newspaper what he had been searching for—a dozen lines which announced to whom it might concern that Mr. Amory Blaine, who “gave his address” as, etc., had been requested to leave his hotel in Atlantic City because of entertaining in his room a lady not his wife.	Two days later back in New York Amory found in a newspaper what he had been searching for—a dozen lines which announced to whom it might concern that Mr. Amory Blaine, who “gave his address” as, etc., had been requested to leave his hotel in Atlantic City because of entertaining in his room a lady not his wife. Then he started, and his fingers trembled, for directly above was a longer paragraph of which the first words were: “Mr. and Mrs. Leland R. Connage are announcing the engagement of their daughter, Rosalind, to Mr. J. Dawson Ryder, of Hartford, Connecticut—” He dropped the paper and lay down on his bed with a frightened, sinking sensation in the pit of his stomach.	Back in New York, Amory found the news he'd been dreading in a newspaper: a short item stating that Mr. Amory Blaine had been asked to leave his Atlantic City hotel for having a woman, not his wife, in his room.

was a longer paragraph of which the first words were: “Mr. and Mrs. Leland R. Connage are announcing the engagement of their daughter, Rosalind, to Mr. J. Dawson Ryder, of Hartford, Connecticut—” He dropped the paper and lay down on his bed with a frightened, sinking sensation in the pit of his stomach.	Two days later back in New York Amory found in a newspaper what he had been searching for—a dozen lines which announced to whom it might concern that Mr. Amory Blaine, who “gave his address” as, etc., had been requested to leave his hotel in Atlantic City because of entertaining in his room a lady not his wife. Then he started, and his fingers trembled, for directly above was a longer paragraph of which the first words were: “Mr. and Mrs. Leland R. Connage are announcing the engagement of their daughter, Rosalind, to Mr. J. Dawson Ryder, of Hartford, Connecticut—” He dropped the paper and lay down on his bed with a frightened, sinking sensation in the pit of his stomach. She was gone, definitely, finally gone.	a longer article began with: “Mr. and Mrs. Leland R. Connage are happy to announce their daughter Rosalind's engagement to Mr. J. Dawson Ryder, of Hartford, Connecticut—” He dropped the paper and lay on his bed, feeling a frightened, sinking feeling in his stomach.

Mr. and Mrs. Leland R. Connage	Two days later back in New York Amory found in a newspaper what he had been searching for—a dozen lines which announced to whom it might concern that Mr. Amory Blaine, who “gave his address” as, etc., had been requested to leave his hotel in Atlantic City because of entertaining in his room a lady not his wife. Then he started, and his fingers trembled, for directly above was a longer paragraph of which the first words were: “Mr. and Mrs. Leland R. Connage are announcing the engagement of their daughter, Rosalind, to Mr. J. Dawson Ryder, of Hartford, Connecticut—” He dropped the paper and lay down on his bed with a frightened, sinking sensation in the pit of his stomach. She was gone, definitely, finally gone.	Leland R. Connage and his wife

mistake, that her heart ached only for the pain she had caused him.	She was gone, definitely, finally gone. Until now he had half unconsciously cherished the hope deep in his heart that some day she would need him and send for him, cry that it had been a mistake, that her heart ached only for the pain she had caused him. Never again could he find even the sombre luxury of wanting her—not this Rosalind, harder, older—nor any beaten, broken woman that his imagination brought to the door of his forties—Amory had wanted her youth, the fresh radiance of her mind and body, the stuff that she was selling now once and for all.	It was a mistake, that she only felt sorry for the pain she had caused him.

the fresh radiance	Until now he had half unconsciously cherished the hope deep in his heart that some day she would need him and send for him, cry that it had been a mistake, that her heart ached only for the pain she had caused him. Never again could he find even the sombre luxury of wanting her—not this Rosalind, harder, older—nor any beaten, broken woman that his imagination brought to the door of his forties—Amory had wanted her youth, the fresh radiance of her mind and body, the stuff that she was selling now once and for all. So far as he was concerned, young Rosalind was dead.	her youthful glow

luxury of wanting her—not this Rosalind, harder, older—nor any beaten, broken woman that his imagination brought to the door of his forties—Amory had wanted her youth, the fresh radiance of her mind and body, the stuff that she was selling now once and for all.	Until now he had half unconsciously cherished the hope deep in his heart that some day she would need him and send for him, cry that it had been a mistake, that her heart ached only for the pain she had caused him. Never again could he find even the sombre luxury of wanting her—not this Rosalind, harder, older—nor any beaten, broken woman that his imagination brought to the door of his forties—Amory had wanted her youth, the fresh radiance of her mind and body, the stuff that she was selling now once and for all. So far as he was concerned, young Rosalind was dead.	the pleasure of longing for her—not this Rosalind, tougher and older—or any defeated, ruined woman his mind might conjure up as he approached forty. Amory had desired her youth, the bright glow of her mind and body, the very thing she was now permanently giving away.

even the sombre luxury	Until now he had half unconsciously cherished the hope deep in his heart that some day she would need him and send for him, cry that it had been a mistake, that her heart ached only for the pain she had caused him. Never again could he find even the sombre luxury of wanting her—not this Rosalind, harder, older—nor any beaten, broken woman that his imagination brought to the door of his forties—Amory had wanted her youth, the fresh radiance of her mind and body, the stuff that she was selling now once and for all. So far as he was concerned, young Rosalind was dead.	even the dark comfort

not this Rosalind	Until now he had half unconsciously cherished the hope deep in his heart that some day she would need him and send for him, cry that it had been a mistake, that her heart ached only for the pain she had caused him. Never again could he find even the sombre luxury of wanting her—not this Rosalind, harder, older—nor any beaten, broken woman that his imagination brought to the door of his forties—Amory had wanted her youth, the fresh radiance of her mind and body, the stuff that she was selling now once and for all. So far as he was concerned, young Rosalind was dead.	Not this version of Rosalind.

harder, older—nor any beaten, broken woman	Until now he had half unconsciously cherished the hope deep in his heart that some day she would need him and send for him, cry that it had been a mistake, that her heart ached only for the pain she had caused him. Never again could he find even the sombre luxury of wanting her—not this Rosalind, harder, older—nor any beaten, broken woman that his imagination brought to the door of his forties—Amory had wanted her youth, the fresh radiance of her mind and body, the stuff that she was selling now once and for all. So far as he was concerned, young Rosalind was dead.	more hardened and older, or any defeated, broken woman

young Rosalind	Never again could he find even the sombre luxury of wanting her—not this Rosalind, harder, older—nor any beaten, broken woman that his imagination brought to the door of his forties—Amory had wanted her youth, the fresh radiance of her mind and body, the stuff that she was selling now once and for all. So far as he was concerned, young Rosalind was dead. A day later came a crisp, terse letter from Mr. Barton in Chicago, which informed him that as three more streetcar companies had gone into the hands of receivers he could expect for the present no further remittances.	young Rosalind

far as he was concerned, young Rosalind was dead.	Never again could he find even the sombre luxury of wanting her—not this Rosalind, harder, older—nor any beaten, broken woman that his imagination brought to the door of his forties—Amory had wanted her youth, the fresh radiance of her mind and body, the stuff that she was selling now once and for all. So far as he was concerned, young Rosalind was dead. A day later came a crisp, terse letter from Mr. Barton in Chicago, which informed him that as three more streetcar companies had gone into the hands of receivers he could expect for the present no further remittances.	As far as he was concerned, the young Rosalind he knew was gone.

gone into the hands of receivers he could expect for the present no further remittances.	So far as he was concerned, young Rosalind was dead. A day later came a crisp, terse letter from Mr. Barton in Chicago, which informed him that as three more streetcar companies had gone into the hands of receivers he could expect for the present no further remittances. Last of all, on a dazed Sunday night, a telegram told him of Monsignor Darcy’s sudden death in Philadelphia five days before.	gone bankrupt, he wouldn't be getting any more money for now.

three more streetcar companies	So far as he was concerned, young Rosalind was dead. A day later came a crisp, terse letter from Mr. Barton in Chicago, which informed him that as three more streetcar companies had gone into the hands of receivers he could expect for the present no further remittances. Last of all, on a dazed Sunday night, a telegram told him of Monsignor Darcy’s sudden death in Philadelphia five days before.	three more trolley companies

a crisp, terse letter	So far as he was concerned, young Rosalind was dead. A day later came a crisp, terse letter from Mr. Barton in Chicago, which informed him that as three more streetcar companies had gone into the hands of receivers he could expect for the present no further remittances. Last of all, on a dazed Sunday night, a telegram told him of Monsignor Darcy’s sudden death in Philadelphia five days before.	a short, sharp letter

no further remittances	So far as he was concerned, young Rosalind was dead. A day later came a crisp, terse letter from Mr. Barton in Chicago, which informed him that as three more streetcar companies had gone into the hands of receivers he could expect for the present no further remittances. Last of all, on a dazed Sunday night, a telegram told him of Monsignor Darcy’s sudden death in Philadelphia five days before.	no more money

a dazed Sunday night	A day later came a crisp, terse letter from Mr. Barton in Chicago, which informed him that as three more streetcar companies had gone into the hands of receivers he could expect for the present no further remittances. Last of all, on a dazed Sunday night, a telegram told him of Monsignor Darcy’s sudden death in Philadelphia five days before. He knew then what it was that he had perceived among the curtains of the room in Atlantic City.	a confused Sunday night

Monsignor Darcy’s sudden death	A day later came a crisp, terse letter from Mr. Barton in Chicago, which informed him that as three more streetcar companies had gone into the hands of receivers he could expect for the present no further remittances. Last of all, on a dazed Sunday night, a telegram told him of Monsignor Darcy’s sudden death in Philadelphia five days before. He knew then what it was that he had perceived among the curtains of the room in Atlantic City.	Monsignor Darcy died suddenly.

told him of Monsignor Darcy’s sudden death in Philadelphia five days before.	A day later came a crisp, terse letter from Mr. Barton in Chicago, which informed him that as three more streetcar companies had gone into the hands of receivers he could expect for the present no further remittances. Last of all, on a dazed Sunday night, a telegram told him of Monsignor Darcy’s sudden death in Philadelphia five days before. He knew then what it was that he had perceived among the curtains of the room in Atlantic City.	told him that Monsignor Darcy had suddenly died in Philadelphia five days earlier.

stream of his life, all its glitterings and dirty shallows.	While the rain drizzled on Amory looked futilely back at the stream of his life, all its glitterings and dirty shallows. To begin with, he was still afraid—not physically afraid any more, but afraid of people and prejudice and misery and monotony.	the course of his life, with all its good and bad parts.

afraid of people and prejudice and misery and monotony.	While the rain drizzled on Amory looked futilely back at the stream of his life, all its glitterings and dirty shallows. To begin with, he was still afraid—not physically afraid any more, but afraid of people and prejudice and misery and monotony. Yet, deep in his bitter heart, he wondered if he was after all worse than this man or the next.	afraid of people, bias, sadness, and boredom.

his bitter heart	To begin with, he was still afraid—not physically afraid any more, but afraid of people and prejudice and misery and monotony. Yet, deep in his bitter heart, he wondered if he was after all worse than this man or the next. He knew that he could sophisticate himself finally into saying that his own weakness was just the result of circumstances and environment; that often when he raged at himself as an egotist something would whisper ingratiatingly: “No. Genius!”	his resentful heart

worse than this man or the next.	To begin with, he was still afraid—not physically afraid any more, but afraid of people and prejudice and misery and monotony. Yet, deep in his bitter heart, he wondered if he was after all worse than this man or the next. He knew that he could sophisticate himself finally into saying that his own weakness was just the result of circumstances and environment; that often when he raged at himself as an egotist something would whisper ingratiatingly: “No. Genius!”	worse than anyone else.

his own weakness	Yet, deep in his bitter heart, he wondered if he was after all worse than this man or the next. He knew that he could sophisticate himself finally into saying that his own weakness was just the result of circumstances and environment; that often when he raged at himself as an egotist something would whisper ingratiatingly: “No. Genius!” That was one manifestation of fear, that voice which whispered that he could not be both great and good, that genius was the exact combination of those inexplicable grooves and twists in his mind, that any discipline would curb it to mediocrity.	his flaws

result of circumstances and environment; that often when he raged at himself as an egotist something would whisper ingratiatingly: “No. Genius!”	Yet, deep in his bitter heart, he wondered if he was after all worse than this man or the next. He knew that he could sophisticate himself finally into saying that his own weakness was just the result of circumstances and environment; that often when he raged at himself as an egotist something would whisper ingratiatingly: “No. Genius!” That was one manifestation of fear, that voice which whispered that he could not be both great and good, that genius was the exact combination of those inexplicable grooves and twists in his mind, that any discipline would curb it to mediocrity.	caused by his situation and surroundings; that when he was angry at his own selfishness, something would flatteringly whisper: "No. You're a genius!"

one manifestation	He knew that he could sophisticate himself finally into saying that his own weakness was just the result of circumstances and environment; that often when he raged at himself as an egotist something would whisper ingratiatingly: “No. Genius!” That was one manifestation of fear, that voice which whispered that he could not be both great and good, that genius was the exact combination of those inexplicable grooves and twists in his mind, that any discipline would curb it to mediocrity. Probably more than any concrete vice or failing Amory despised his own personality—he loathed knowing that tomorrow and the thousand days after he would swell pompously at a compliment and sulk at an ill word like a third-rate musician or a first-class actor.	one example

combination of those inexplicable grooves and twists in his mind, that any discipline would curb it to mediocrity.	He knew that he could sophisticate himself finally into saying that his own weakness was just the result of circumstances and environment; that often when he raged at himself as an egotist something would whisper ingratiatingly: “No. Genius!” That was one manifestation of fear, that voice which whispered that he could not be both great and good, that genius was the exact combination of those inexplicable grooves and twists in his mind, that any discipline would curb it to mediocrity. Probably more than any concrete vice or failing Amory despised his own personality—he loathed knowing that tomorrow and the thousand days after he would swell pompously at a compliment and sulk at an ill word like a third-rate musician or a first-class actor.	a unique way of thinking, and any self-control would make him ordinary.

those inexplicable grooves	He knew that he could sophisticate himself finally into saying that his own weakness was just the result of circumstances and environment; that often when he raged at himself as an egotist something would whisper ingratiatingly: “No. Genius!” That was one manifestation of fear, that voice which whispered that he could not be both great and good, that genius was the exact combination of those inexplicable grooves and twists in his mind, that any discipline would curb it to mediocrity. Probably more than any concrete vice or failing Amory despised his own personality—he loathed knowing that tomorrow and the thousand days after he would swell pompously at a compliment and sulk at an ill word like a third-rate musician or a first-class actor.	those strange quirks

more than any concrete vice or failing Amory despised his own personality—he loathed knowing that tomorrow and the thousand days after he would swell pompously at a compliment and sulk at an ill word like a third-rate musician or a first-class actor.	That was one manifestation of fear, that voice which whispered that he could not be both great and good, that genius was the exact combination of those inexplicable grooves and twists in his mind, that any discipline would curb it to mediocrity. Probably more than any concrete vice or failing Amory despised his own personality—he loathed knowing that tomorrow and the thousand days after he would swell pompously at a compliment and sulk at an ill word like a third-rate musician or a first-class actor. He was ashamed of the fact that very simple and honest people usually distrusted him; that he had been cruel, often, to those who had sunk their personalities in him—several girls, and a man here and there through college, that he had been an evil influence on; people who had followed him here and there into mental adventures from which he alone rebounded unscathed.	More than any specific bad habit or flaw, Amory hated his own personality. He hated knowing that in the future, he'd puff up with pride at a compliment and sulk at criticism, like a mediocre musician or a melodramatic actor.

ashamed of the fact that very simple and honest people usually distrusted him; that he had been cruel, often, to those who had sunk their personalities in him—several girls, and a man here and there through college, that he had been an evil influence on; people who had followed him here and there into mental adventures from which he alone rebounded unscathed.	Probably more than any concrete vice or failing Amory despised his own personality—he loathed knowing that tomorrow and the thousand days after he would swell pompously at a compliment and sulk at an ill word like a third-rate musician or a first-class actor. He was ashamed of the fact that very simple and honest people usually distrusted him; that he had been cruel, often, to those who had sunk their personalities in him—several girls, and a man here and there through college, that he had been an evil influence on; people who had followed him here and there into mental adventures from which he alone rebounded unscathed. Usually, on nights like this, for there had been many lately, he could escape from this consuming introspection by thinking of children and the infinite possibilities of children—he leaned and listened and he heard a startled baby awake in a house across the street and lend a tiny whimper to the still night.	He was ashamed that simple, honest people usually didn't trust him, and that he'd often been cruel to people who'd invested their identities in him—several girls and a few men in college—people he'd negatively influenced and led into mental explorations from which he was the only one to escape unharmed.

very simple and honest people	Probably more than any concrete vice or failing Amory despised his own personality—he loathed knowing that tomorrow and the thousand days after he would swell pompously at a compliment and sulk at an ill word like a third-rate musician or a first-class actor. He was ashamed of the fact that very simple and honest people usually distrusted him; that he had been cruel, often, to those who had sunk their personalities in him—several girls, and a man here and there through college, that he had been an evil influence on; people who had followed him here and there into mental adventures from which he alone rebounded unscathed. Usually, on nights like this, for there had been many lately, he could escape from this consuming introspection by thinking of children and the infinite possibilities of children—he leaned and listened and he heard a startled baby awake in a house across the street and lend a tiny whimper to the still night.	straightforward and genuine people

this consuming introspection	He was ashamed of the fact that very simple and honest people usually distrusted him; that he had been cruel, often, to those who had sunk their personalities in him—several girls, and a man here and there through college, that he had been an evil influence on; people who had followed him here and there into mental adventures from which he alone rebounded unscathed. Usually, on nights like this, for there had been many lately, he could escape from this consuming introspection by thinking of children and the infinite possibilities of children—he leaned and listened and he heard a startled baby awake in a house across the street and lend a tiny whimper to the still night. Quick as a flash he turned away, wondering with a touch of panic whether something in the brooding despair of his mood had made a darkness in its tiny soul.	this overwhelming self-reflection

a startled baby	He was ashamed of the fact that very simple and honest people usually distrusted him; that he had been cruel, often, to those who had sunk their personalities in him—several girls, and a man here and there through college, that he had been an evil influence on; people who had followed him here and there into mental adventures from which he alone rebounded unscathed. Usually, on nights like this, for there had been many lately, he could escape from this consuming introspection by thinking of children and the infinite possibilities of children—he leaned and listened and he heard a startled baby awake in a house across the street and lend a tiny whimper to the still night. Quick as a flash he turned away, wondering with a touch of panic whether something in the brooding despair of his mood had made a darkness in its tiny soul.	a baby startled

escape from this consuming introspection by thinking of children and the infinite possibilities of children—he leaned and listened and he heard a startled baby awake in a house across the street and lend a tiny whimper to the still night.	He was ashamed of the fact that very simple and honest people usually distrusted him; that he had been cruel, often, to those who had sunk their personalities in him—several girls, and a man here and there through college, that he had been an evil influence on; people who had followed him here and there into mental adventures from which he alone rebounded unscathed. Usually, on nights like this, for there had been many lately, he could escape from this consuming introspection by thinking of children and the infinite possibilities of children—he leaned and listened and he heard a startled baby awake in a house across the street and lend a tiny whimper to the still night. Quick as a flash he turned away, wondering with a touch of panic whether something in the brooding despair of his mood had made a darkness in its tiny soul.	escape his overwhelming self-analysis by thinking about children and their endless potential. He listened and heard a baby wake up, startled, in a house across the street, its small cry adding to the quiet night.

a tiny whimper	He was ashamed of the fact that very simple and honest people usually distrusted him; that he had been cruel, often, to those who had sunk their personalities in him—several girls, and a man here and there through college, that he had been an evil influence on; people who had followed him here and there into mental adventures from which he alone rebounded unscathed. Usually, on nights like this, for there had been many lately, he could escape from this consuming introspection by thinking of children and the infinite possibilities of children—he leaned and listened and he heard a startled baby awake in a house across the street and lend a tiny whimper to the still night. Quick as a flash he turned away, wondering with a touch of panic whether something in the brooding despair of his mood had made a darkness in its tiny soul.	a small cry

wondering with a touch of panic whether something in the brooding despair of his mood had made a darkness in its tiny soul.	Usually, on nights like this, for there had been many lately, he could escape from this consuming introspection by thinking of children and the infinite possibilities of children—he leaned and listened and he heard a startled baby awake in a house across the street and lend a tiny whimper to the still night. Quick as a flash he turned away, wondering with a touch of panic whether something in the brooding despair of his mood had made a darkness in its tiny soul. He shivered.	worried with a hint of panic if his dark mood had somehow affected the baby.

the brooding despair	Usually, on nights like this, for there had been many lately, he could escape from this consuming introspection by thinking of children and the infinite possibilities of children—he leaned and listened and he heard a startled baby awake in a house across the street and lend a tiny whimper to the still night. Quick as a flash he turned away, wondering with a touch of panic whether something in the brooding despair of his mood had made a darkness in its tiny soul. He shivered.	the overwhelming sadness

mad of that dark continent upon the moon.	He shivered. What if some day the balance was overturned, and he became a thing that frightened children and crept into rooms in the dark, approached dim communion with those phantoms who whispered shadowy secrets to the mad of that dark continent upon the moon. Amory smiled a bit.	lunatics on the moon.

shadowy secrets	He shivered. What if some day the balance was overturned, and he became a thing that frightened children and crept into rooms in the dark, approached dim communion with those phantoms who whispered shadowy secrets to the mad of that dark continent upon the moon. Amory smiled a bit.	dark secrets

approached dim communion	He shivered. What if some day the balance was overturned, and he became a thing that frightened children and crept into rooms in the dark, approached dim communion with those phantoms who whispered shadowy secrets to the mad of that dark continent upon the moon. Amory smiled a bit.	nearly communicated

think too much about myself.”	And again— “Get out and do some real work—” “Stop worrying—” He fancied a possible future comment of his own. “Yes—I was perhaps an egotist in youth, but I soon found it made me morbid to think too much about myself.” Suddenly he felt an overwhelming desire to let himself go to the devil—not to go violently as a gentleman should, but to sink safely and sensuously out of sight.	think about myself too much.

desire to let himself go to the devil—not to go violently as a gentleman should, but to sink safely and sensuously out of sight.	“Yes—I was perhaps an egotist in youth, but I soon found it made me morbid to think too much about myself.” Suddenly he felt an overwhelming desire to let himself go to the devil—not to go violently as a gentleman should, but to sink safely and sensuously out of sight. He pictured himself in an adobe house in Mexico, half-reclining on a rug-covered couch, his slender, artistic fingers closed on a cigarette while he listened to guitars strumming melancholy undertones to an age-old dirge of Castile and an olive-skinned, carmine-lipped girl caressed his hair.	desire to ruin himself—not in a dramatic, respectable way, but to disappear gradually and pleasurably.

an overwhelming desire	“Yes—I was perhaps an egotist in youth, but I soon found it made me morbid to think too much about myself.” Suddenly he felt an overwhelming desire to let himself go to the devil—not to go violently as a gentleman should, but to sink safely and sensuously out of sight. He pictured himself in an adobe house in Mexico, half-reclining on a rug-covered couch, his slender, artistic fingers closed on a cigarette while he listened to guitars strumming melancholy undertones to an age-old dirge of Castile and an olive-skinned, carmine-lipped girl caressed his hair.	a very strong urge

an olive-skinned, carmine-lipped girl	Suddenly he felt an overwhelming desire to let himself go to the devil—not to go violently as a gentleman should, but to sink safely and sensuously out of sight. He pictured himself in an adobe house in Mexico, half-reclining on a rug-covered couch, his slender, artistic fingers closed on a cigarette while he listened to guitars strumming melancholy undertones to an age-old dirge of Castile and an olive-skinned, carmine-lipped girl caressed his hair. Here he might live a strange litany, delivered from right and wrong and from the hound of heaven and from every God (except the exotic Mexican one who was pretty slack himself and rather addicted to Oriental scents)—delivered from success and hope and poverty into that long chute of indulgence which led, after all, only to the artificial lake of death.	a girl with olive skin and red lips

a rug-covered couch	Suddenly he felt an overwhelming desire to let himself go to the devil—not to go violently as a gentleman should, but to sink safely and sensuously out of sight. He pictured himself in an adobe house in Mexico, half-reclining on a rug-covered couch, his slender, artistic fingers closed on a cigarette while he listened to guitars strumming melancholy undertones to an age-old dirge of Castile and an olive-skinned, carmine-lipped girl caressed his hair. Here he might live a strange litany, delivered from right and wrong and from the hound of heaven and from every God (except the exotic Mexican one who was pretty slack himself and rather addicted to Oriental scents)—delivered from success and hope and poverty into that long chute of indulgence which led, after all, only to the artificial lake of death.	a couch covered with a rug

melancholy undertones	Suddenly he felt an overwhelming desire to let himself go to the devil—not to go violently as a gentleman should, but to sink safely and sensuously out of sight. He pictured himself in an adobe house in Mexico, half-reclining on a rug-covered couch, his slender, artistic fingers closed on a cigarette while he listened to guitars strumming melancholy undertones to an age-old dirge of Castile and an olive-skinned, carmine-lipped girl caressed his hair. Here he might live a strange litany, delivered from right and wrong and from the hound of heaven and from every God (except the exotic Mexican one who was pretty slack himself and rather addicted to Oriental scents)—delivered from success and hope and poverty into that long chute of indulgence which led, after all, only to the artificial lake of death.	sad, low sounds

his slender, artistic fingers	Suddenly he felt an overwhelming desire to let himself go to the devil—not to go violently as a gentleman should, but to sink safely and sensuously out of sight. He pictured himself in an adobe house in Mexico, half-reclining on a rug-covered couch, his slender, artistic fingers closed on a cigarette while he listened to guitars strumming melancholy undertones to an age-old dirge of Castile and an olive-skinned, carmine-lipped girl caressed his hair. Here he might live a strange litany, delivered from right and wrong and from the hound of heaven and from every God (except the exotic Mexican one who was pretty slack himself and rather addicted to Oriental scents)—delivered from success and hope and poverty into that long chute of indulgence which led, after all, only to the artificial lake of death.	his thin, artistic fingers

closed on a cigarette while he listened to guitars strumming melancholy undertones to an age-old dirge of Castile and an olive-skinned, carmine-lipped girl caressed his hair.	Suddenly he felt an overwhelming desire to let himself go to the devil—not to go violently as a gentleman should, but to sink safely and sensuously out of sight. He pictured himself in an adobe house in Mexico, half-reclining on a rug-covered couch, his slender, artistic fingers closed on a cigarette while he listened to guitars strumming melancholy undertones to an age-old dirge of Castile and an olive-skinned, carmine-lipped girl caressed his hair. Here he might live a strange litany, delivered from right and wrong and from the hound of heaven and from every God (except the exotic Mexican one who was pretty slack himself and rather addicted to Oriental scents)—delivered from success and hope and poverty into that long chute of indulgence which led, after all, only to the artificial lake of death.	holding a cigarette, listening to guitars playing sad, old Spanish songs, while a dark-haired, red-lipped girl stroked his hair.

an age-old dirge	Suddenly he felt an overwhelming desire to let himself go to the devil—not to go violently as a gentleman should, but to sink safely and sensuously out of sight. He pictured himself in an adobe house in Mexico, half-reclining on a rug-covered couch, his slender, artistic fingers closed on a cigarette while he listened to guitars strumming melancholy undertones to an age-old dirge of Castile and an olive-skinned, carmine-lipped girl caressed his hair. Here he might live a strange litany, delivered from right and wrong and from the hound of heaven and from every God (except the exotic Mexican one who was pretty slack himself and rather addicted to Oriental scents)—delivered from success and hope and poverty into that long chute of indulgence which led, after all, only to the artificial lake of death.	a very old sad song

from every God (except the exotic Mexican one who was pretty slack himself and rather addicted to Oriental scents)—delivered from success and hope and poverty into that long chute of indulgence which led, after all, only to the artificial lake of death.	He pictured himself in an adobe house in Mexico, half-reclining on a rug-covered couch, his slender, artistic fingers closed on a cigarette while he listened to guitars strumming melancholy undertones to an age-old dirge of Castile and an olive-skinned, carmine-lipped girl caressed his hair. Here he might live a strange litany, delivered from right and wrong and from the hound of heaven and from every God (except the exotic Mexican one who was pretty slack himself and rather addicted to Oriental scents)—delivered from success and hope and poverty into that long chute of indulgence which led, after all, only to the artificial lake of death. There were so many places where one might deteriorate pleasantly: Port Said, Shanghai, parts of Turkestan, Constantinople, the South Seas—all lands of sad, haunting music and many odors, where lust could be a mode and expression of life, where the shades of night skies and sunsets would seem to reflect only moods of passion: the colors of lips and poppies.	from all gods (except the laid-back Mexican one who liked incense)—freed from success, hope, and poverty, into a life of pleasure that ultimately leads to death.

a strange litany	He pictured himself in an adobe house in Mexico, half-reclining on a rug-covered couch, his slender, artistic fingers closed on a cigarette while he listened to guitars strumming melancholy undertones to an age-old dirge of Castile and an olive-skinned, carmine-lipped girl caressed his hair. Here he might live a strange litany, delivered from right and wrong and from the hound of heaven and from every God (except the exotic Mexican one who was pretty slack himself and rather addicted to Oriental scents)—delivered from success and hope and poverty into that long chute of indulgence which led, after all, only to the artificial lake of death. There were so many places where one might deteriorate pleasantly: Port Said, Shanghai, parts of Turkestan, Constantinople, the South Seas—all lands of sad, haunting music and many odors, where lust could be a mode and expression of life, where the shades of night skies and sunsets would seem to reflect only moods of passion: the colors of lips and poppies.	an unusual routine

that long chute	He pictured himself in an adobe house in Mexico, half-reclining on a rug-covered couch, his slender, artistic fingers closed on a cigarette while he listened to guitars strumming melancholy undertones to an age-old dirge of Castile and an olive-skinned, carmine-lipped girl caressed his hair. Here he might live a strange litany, delivered from right and wrong and from the hound of heaven and from every God (except the exotic Mexican one who was pretty slack himself and rather addicted to Oriental scents)—delivered from success and hope and poverty into that long chute of indulgence which led, after all, only to the artificial lake of death. There were so many places where one might deteriorate pleasantly: Port Said, Shanghai, parts of Turkestan, Constantinople, the South Seas—all lands of sad, haunting music and many odors, where lust could be a mode and expression of life, where the shades of night skies and sunsets would seem to reflect only moods of passion: the colors of lips and poppies.	that long slide

many odors	Here he might live a strange litany, delivered from right and wrong and from the hound of heaven and from every God (except the exotic Mexican one who was pretty slack himself and rather addicted to Oriental scents)—delivered from success and hope and poverty into that long chute of indulgence which led, after all, only to the artificial lake of death. There were so many places where one might deteriorate pleasantly: Port Said, Shanghai, parts of Turkestan, Constantinople, the South Seas—all lands of sad, haunting music and many odors, where lust could be a mode and expression of life, where the shades of night skies and sunsets would seem to reflect only moods of passion: the colors of lips and poppies.	lots of smells

sad, haunting music	Here he might live a strange litany, delivered from right and wrong and from the hound of heaven and from every God (except the exotic Mexican one who was pretty slack himself and rather addicted to Oriental scents)—delivered from success and hope and poverty into that long chute of indulgence which led, after all, only to the artificial lake of death. There were so many places where one might deteriorate pleasantly: Port Said, Shanghai, parts of Turkestan, Constantinople, the South Seas—all lands of sad, haunting music and many odors, where lust could be a mode and expression of life, where the shades of night skies and sunsets would seem to reflect only moods of passion: the colors of lips and poppies.	melancholy, unforgettable music

life, where the shades of night skies and sunsets would seem to reflect only moods of passion: the colors of lips and poppies.	Here he might live a strange litany, delivered from right and wrong and from the hound of heaven and from every God (except the exotic Mexican one who was pretty slack himself and rather addicted to Oriental scents)—delivered from success and hope and poverty into that long chute of indulgence which led, after all, only to the artificial lake of death. There were so many places where one might deteriorate pleasantly: Port Said, Shanghai, parts of Turkestan, Constantinople, the South Seas—all lands of sad, haunting music and many odors, where lust could be a mode and expression of life, where the shades of night skies and sunsets would seem to reflect only moods of passion: the colors of lips and poppies.	Life where dark skies and sunsets seemed to mirror only intense feelings: the colors of lips and poppies.

Phoebe’s room	Once he had been miraculously able to scent evil as a horse detects a broken bridge at night, but the man with the queer feet in Phoebe’s room had diminished to the aura over Jill. His instinct perceived the fetidness of poverty, but no longer ferreted out the deeper evils in pride and sensuality.	Phoebe's room

man with the queer feet in Phoebe’s room had diminished to the aura over Jill.	Once he had been miraculously able to scent evil as a horse detects a broken bridge at night, but the man with the queer feet in Phoebe’s room had diminished to the aura over Jill. His instinct perceived the fetidness of poverty, but no longer ferreted out the deeper evils in pride and sensuality.	The strange man he'd sensed in Phoebe's room was now just a feeling he got from Jill.

the queer feet	Once he had been miraculously able to scent evil as a horse detects a broken bridge at night, but the man with the queer feet in Phoebe’s room had diminished to the aura over Jill. His instinct perceived the fetidness of poverty, but no longer ferreted out the deeper evils in pride and sensuality.	the strange feet

fetidness of poverty, but no longer ferreted out the deeper evils in pride and sensuality.	Once he had been miraculously able to scent evil as a horse detects a broken bridge at night, but the man with the queer feet in Phoebe’s room had diminished to the aura over Jill. His instinct perceived the fetidness of poverty, but no longer ferreted out the deeper evils in pride and sensuality. There were no more wise men; there were no more heroes; Burne Holiday was sunk from sight as though he had never lived; Monsignor was dead.	the stink of poverty, but he could no longer sniff out the worse evils of pride and lust.

lived; Monsignor was dead.	His instinct perceived the fetidness of poverty, but no longer ferreted out the deeper evils in pride and sensuality. There were no more wise men; there were no more heroes; Burne Holiday was sunk from sight as though he had never lived; Monsignor was dead. Amory had grown up to a thousand books, a thousand lies; he had listened eagerly to people who pretended to know, who knew nothing.	Monsignor was dead.

people who pretended to know, who knew nothing.	There were no more wise men; there were no more heroes; Burne Holiday was sunk from sight as though he had never lived; Monsignor was dead. Amory had grown up to a thousand books, a thousand lies; he had listened eagerly to people who pretended to know, who knew nothing. The mystical reveries of saints that had once filled him with awe in the still hours of night, now vaguely repelled him.	people who acted like they knew things, but didn't.

The mystical reveries	Amory had grown up to a thousand books, a thousand lies; he had listened eagerly to people who pretended to know, who knew nothing. The mystical reveries of saints that had once filled him with awe in the still hours of night, now vaguely repelled him. The Byrons and Brookes who had defied life from mountain tops were in the end but flaneurs and poseurs, at best mistaking the shadow of courage for the substance of wisdom.	Mystical daydreams

reveries of saints that had once filled him with awe in the still hours of night, now vaguely repelled him.	Amory had grown up to a thousand books, a thousand lies; he had listened eagerly to people who pretended to know, who knew nothing. The mystical reveries of saints that had once filled him with awe in the still hours of night, now vaguely repelled him. The Byrons and Brookes who had defied life from mountain tops were in the end but flaneurs and poseurs, at best mistaking the shadow of courage for the substance of wisdom.	thoughts about holy people that used to fill him with wonder at night, now slightly disgusted him.

courage for the substance of wisdom.	The mystical reveries of saints that had once filled him with awe in the still hours of night, now vaguely repelled him. The Byrons and Brookes who had defied life from mountain tops were in the end but flaneurs and poseurs, at best mistaking the shadow of courage for the substance of wisdom. The pageantry of his disillusion took shape in a world-old procession of Prophets, Athenians, Martyrs, Saints, Scientists, Don Juans, Jesuits, Puritans, Fausts, Poets, Pacifists; like costumed alumni at a college reunion they streamed before him as their dreams, personalities, and creeds had in turn thrown colored lights on his soul; each had tried to express the glory of life and the tremendous significance of man; each had boasted of synchronizing what had gone before into his own rickety generalities; each had depended after all on the set stage and the convention of the theatre, which is that man in his hunger for faith will feed his mind with the nearest and most convenient food.	bravery for real understanding.

costumed alumni	The Byrons and Brookes who had defied life from mountain tops were in the end but flaneurs and poseurs, at best mistaking the shadow of courage for the substance of wisdom. The pageantry of his disillusion took shape in a world-old procession of Prophets, Athenians, Martyrs, Saints, Scientists, Don Juans, Jesuits, Puritans, Fausts, Poets, Pacifists; like costumed alumni at a college reunion they streamed before him as their dreams, personalities, and creeds had in turn thrown colored lights on his soul; each had tried to express the glory of life and the tremendous significance of man; each had boasted of synchronizing what had gone before into his own rickety generalities; each had depended after all on the set stage and the convention of the theatre, which is that man in his hunger for faith will feed his mind with the nearest and most convenient food. Women—of whom he had expected so much; whose beauty he had hoped to transmute into modes of art; whose unfathomable instincts, marvellously incoherent and inarticulate, he had thought to perpetuate in terms of experience—had become merely consecrations to their own posterity.	people dressed up like graduates at a college reunion

the nearest and most convenient food	The Byrons and Brookes who had defied life from mountain tops were in the end but flaneurs and poseurs, at best mistaking the shadow of courage for the substance of wisdom. The pageantry of his disillusion took shape in a world-old procession of Prophets, Athenians, Martyrs, Saints, Scientists, Don Juans, Jesuits, Puritans, Fausts, Poets, Pacifists; like costumed alumni at a college reunion they streamed before him as their dreams, personalities, and creeds had in turn thrown colored lights on his soul; each had tried to express the glory of life and the tremendous significance of man; each had boasted of synchronizing what had gone before into his own rickety generalities; each had depended after all on the set stage and the convention of the theatre, which is that man in his hunger for faith will feed his mind with the nearest and most convenient food. Women—of whom he had expected so much; whose beauty he had hoped to transmute into modes of art; whose unfathomable instincts, marvellously incoherent and inarticulate, he had thought to perpetuate in terms of experience—had become merely consecrations to their own posterity.	whatever is easiest and most readily available

thrown colored lights on his soul; each had tried to express the glory of life and the tremendous significance of man; each had boasted of synchronizing what had gone before into his own rickety generalities; each had depended after all on the set stage and the convention of the theatre, which is that man in his hunger for faith will feed his mind with the nearest and most convenient food.	The Byrons and Brookes who had defied life from mountain tops were in the end but flaneurs and poseurs, at best mistaking the shadow of courage for the substance of wisdom. The pageantry of his disillusion took shape in a world-old procession of Prophets, Athenians, Martyrs, Saints, Scientists, Don Juans, Jesuits, Puritans, Fausts, Poets, Pacifists; like costumed alumni at a college reunion they streamed before him as their dreams, personalities, and creeds had in turn thrown colored lights on his soul; each had tried to express the glory of life and the tremendous significance of man; each had boasted of synchronizing what had gone before into his own rickety generalities; each had depended after all on the set stage and the convention of the theatre, which is that man in his hunger for faith will feed his mind with the nearest and most convenient food. Women—of whom he had expected so much; whose beauty he had hoped to transmute into modes of art; whose unfathomable instincts, marvellously incoherent and inarticulate, he had thought to perpetuate in terms of experience—had become merely consecrations to their own posterity.	had influenced him; each had tried to show life's beauty and humanity's importance; each had claimed to combine past ideas into their own shaky theories; each ultimately relied on appearances and accepted beliefs, because people searching for faith will believe whatever is easiest.

his own rickety generalities	The Byrons and Brookes who had defied life from mountain tops were in the end but flaneurs and poseurs, at best mistaking the shadow of courage for the substance of wisdom. The pageantry of his disillusion took shape in a world-old procession of Prophets, Athenians, Martyrs, Saints, Scientists, Don Juans, Jesuits, Puritans, Fausts, Poets, Pacifists; like costumed alumni at a college reunion they streamed before him as their dreams, personalities, and creeds had in turn thrown colored lights on his soul; each had tried to express the glory of life and the tremendous significance of man; each had boasted of synchronizing what had gone before into his own rickety generalities; each had depended after all on the set stage and the convention of the theatre, which is that man in his hunger for faith will feed his mind with the nearest and most convenient food. Women—of whom he had expected so much; whose beauty he had hoped to transmute into modes of art; whose unfathomable instincts, marvellously incoherent and inarticulate, he had thought to perpetuate in terms of experience—had become merely consecrations to their own posterity.	his own shaky conclusions

a world-old procession	The Byrons and Brookes who had defied life from mountain tops were in the end but flaneurs and poseurs, at best mistaking the shadow of courage for the substance of wisdom. The pageantry of his disillusion took shape in a world-old procession of Prophets, Athenians, Martyrs, Saints, Scientists, Don Juans, Jesuits, Puritans, Fausts, Poets, Pacifists; like costumed alumni at a college reunion they streamed before him as their dreams, personalities, and creeds had in turn thrown colored lights on his soul; each had tried to express the glory of life and the tremendous significance of man; each had boasted of synchronizing what had gone before into his own rickety generalities; each had depended after all on the set stage and the convention of the theatre, which is that man in his hunger for faith will feed his mind with the nearest and most convenient food. Women—of whom he had expected so much; whose beauty he had hoped to transmute into modes of art; whose unfathomable instincts, marvellously incoherent and inarticulate, he had thought to perpetuate in terms of experience—had become merely consecrations to their own posterity.	an age-old parade

whose unfathomable instincts	The pageantry of his disillusion took shape in a world-old procession of Prophets, Athenians, Martyrs, Saints, Scientists, Don Juans, Jesuits, Puritans, Fausts, Poets, Pacifists; like costumed alumni at a college reunion they streamed before him as their dreams, personalities, and creeds had in turn thrown colored lights on his soul; each had tried to express the glory of life and the tremendous significance of man; each had boasted of synchronizing what had gone before into his own rickety generalities; each had depended after all on the set stage and the convention of the theatre, which is that man in his hunger for faith will feed his mind with the nearest and most convenient food. Women—of whom he had expected so much; whose beauty he had hoped to transmute into modes of art; whose unfathomable instincts, marvellously incoherent and inarticulate, he had thought to perpetuate in terms of experience—had become merely consecrations to their own posterity. Isabelle, Clara, Rosalind, Eleanor, were all removed by their very beauty, around which men had swarmed, from the possibility of contributing anything but a sick heart and a page of puzzled words to write.	whose mysterious intuitions

modes of art; whose unfathomable instincts, marvellously incoherent and inarticulate, he had thought to perpetuate in terms of experience—had become merely consecrations to their own posterity.	The pageantry of his disillusion took shape in a world-old procession of Prophets, Athenians, Martyrs, Saints, Scientists, Don Juans, Jesuits, Puritans, Fausts, Poets, Pacifists; like costumed alumni at a college reunion they streamed before him as their dreams, personalities, and creeds had in turn thrown colored lights on his soul; each had tried to express the glory of life and the tremendous significance of man; each had boasted of synchronizing what had gone before into his own rickety generalities; each had depended after all on the set stage and the convention of the theatre, which is that man in his hunger for faith will feed his mind with the nearest and most convenient food. Women—of whom he had expected so much; whose beauty he had hoped to transmute into modes of art; whose unfathomable instincts, marvellously incoherent and inarticulate, he had thought to perpetuate in terms of experience—had become merely consecrations to their own posterity. Isabelle, Clara, Rosalind, Eleanor, were all removed by their very beauty, around which men had swarmed, from the possibility of contributing anything but a sick heart and a page of puzzled words to write.	forms of art; whose mysterious and wonderfully unclear instincts he'd hoped to capture through lived experience, had simply become dedicated to producing the next generation.

their own posterity	The pageantry of his disillusion took shape in a world-old procession of Prophets, Athenians, Martyrs, Saints, Scientists, Don Juans, Jesuits, Puritans, Fausts, Poets, Pacifists; like costumed alumni at a college reunion they streamed before him as their dreams, personalities, and creeds had in turn thrown colored lights on his soul; each had tried to express the glory of life and the tremendous significance of man; each had boasted of synchronizing what had gone before into his own rickety generalities; each had depended after all on the set stage and the convention of the theatre, which is that man in his hunger for faith will feed his mind with the nearest and most convenient food. Women—of whom he had expected so much; whose beauty he had hoped to transmute into modes of art; whose unfathomable instincts, marvellously incoherent and inarticulate, he had thought to perpetuate in terms of experience—had become merely consecrations to their own posterity. Isabelle, Clara, Rosalind, Eleanor, were all removed by their very beauty, around which men had swarmed, from the possibility of contributing anything but a sick heart and a page of puzzled words to write.	their children

beauty, around which men had swarmed, from the possibility of contributing anything but a sick heart and a page of puzzled words to write.	Women—of whom he had expected so much; whose beauty he had hoped to transmute into modes of art; whose unfathomable instincts, marvellously incoherent and inarticulate, he had thought to perpetuate in terms of experience—had become merely consecrations to their own posterity. Isabelle, Clara, Rosalind, Eleanor, were all removed by their very beauty, around which men had swarmed, from the possibility of contributing anything but a sick heart and a page of puzzled words to write. Amory based his loss of faith in help from others on several sweeping syllogisms.	Their beauty, which attracted so many men, prevented them from offering anything other than heartache and confused writing.

several sweeping syllogisms	Isabelle, Clara, Rosalind, Eleanor, were all removed by their very beauty, around which men had swarmed, from the possibility of contributing anything but a sick heart and a page of puzzled words to write. Amory based his loss of faith in help from others on several sweeping syllogisms. Granted that his generation, however bruised and decimated from this Victorian war, were the heirs of progress.	several broad, logical arguments

help from others on several sweeping syllogisms.	Isabelle, Clara, Rosalind, Eleanor, were all removed by their very beauty, around which men had swarmed, from the possibility of contributing anything but a sick heart and a page of puzzled words to write. Amory based his loss of faith in help from others on several sweeping syllogisms. Granted that his generation, however bruised and decimated from this Victorian war, were the heirs of progress.	depending on broad generalizations about people.

heirs of progress.	Amory based his loss of faith in help from others on several sweeping syllogisms. Granted that his generation, however bruised and decimated from this Victorian war, were the heirs of progress. Waving aside petty differences of conclusions which, although they might occasionally cause the deaths of several millions of young men, might be explained away—supposing that after all Bernard Shaw and Bernhardi, Bonar Law and Bethmann-Hollweg were mutual heirs of progress if only in agreeing against the ducking of witches—waiving the antitheses and approaching individually these men who seemed to be the leaders, he was repelled by the discrepancies and contradictions in the men themselves.	people who would naturally benefit from advancements.

petty differences	Granted that his generation, however bruised and decimated from this Victorian war, were the heirs of progress. Waving aside petty differences of conclusions which, although they might occasionally cause the deaths of several millions of young men, might be explained away—supposing that after all Bernard Shaw and Bernhardi, Bonar Law and Bethmann-Hollweg were mutual heirs of progress if only in agreeing against the ducking of witches—waiving the antitheses and approaching individually these men who seemed to be the leaders, he was repelled by the discrepancies and contradictions in the men themselves. There was, for example, Thornton Hancock, respected by half the intellectual world as an authority on life, a man who had verified and believed the code he lived by, an educator of educators, an adviser to Presidents—yet Amory knew that this man had, in his heart, leaned on the priest of another religion.	small disagreements

agreeing against the ducking of witches—waiving the antitheses and approaching individually these men who seemed to be the leaders, he was repelled by the discrepancies and contradictions in the men themselves.	Granted that his generation, however bruised and decimated from this Victorian war, were the heirs of progress. Waving aside petty differences of conclusions which, although they might occasionally cause the deaths of several millions of young men, might be explained away—supposing that after all Bernard Shaw and Bernhardi, Bonar Law and Bethmann-Hollweg were mutual heirs of progress if only in agreeing against the ducking of witches—waiving the antitheses and approaching individually these men who seemed to be the leaders, he was repelled by the discrepancies and contradictions in the men themselves. There was, for example, Thornton Hancock, respected by half the intellectual world as an authority on life, a man who had verified and believed the code he lived by, an educator of educators, an adviser to Presidents—yet Amory knew that this man had, in his heart, leaned on the priest of another religion.	agreeing that witch dunking was wrong—ignoring the opposing viewpoints and looking at these leaders individually, he was disgusted by their inconsistencies and contradictions.

mutual heirs	Granted that his generation, however bruised and decimated from this Victorian war, were the heirs of progress. Waving aside petty differences of conclusions which, although they might occasionally cause the deaths of several millions of young men, might be explained away—supposing that after all Bernard Shaw and Bernhardi, Bonar Law and Bethmann-Hollweg were mutual heirs of progress if only in agreeing against the ducking of witches—waiving the antitheses and approaching individually these men who seemed to be the leaders, he was repelled by the discrepancies and contradictions in the men themselves. There was, for example, Thornton Hancock, respected by half the intellectual world as an authority on life, a man who had verified and believed the code he lived by, an educator of educators, an adviser to Presidents—yet Amory knew that this man had, in his heart, leaned on the priest of another religion.	shared beneficiaries

leaned on the priest of another religion.	Waving aside petty differences of conclusions which, although they might occasionally cause the deaths of several millions of young men, might be explained away—supposing that after all Bernard Shaw and Bernhardi, Bonar Law and Bethmann-Hollweg were mutual heirs of progress if only in agreeing against the ducking of witches—waiving the antitheses and approaching individually these men who seemed to be the leaders, he was repelled by the discrepancies and contradictions in the men themselves. There was, for example, Thornton Hancock, respected by half the intellectual world as an authority on life, a man who had verified and believed the code he lived by, an educator of educators, an adviser to Presidents—yet Amory knew that this man had, in his heart, leaned on the priest of another religion. And Monsignor, upon whom a cardinal rested, had moments of strange and horrible insecurity—inexplicable in a religion that explained even disbelief in terms of its own faith: if you doubted the devil it was the devil that made you doubt him.	relied on the priest of a different religion.

religion that explained even disbelief in terms of its own faith: if you doubted the devil it was the devil that made you doubt him.	There was, for example, Thornton Hancock, respected by half the intellectual world as an authority on life, a man who had verified and believed the code he lived by, an educator of educators, an adviser to Presidents—yet Amory knew that this man had, in his heart, leaned on the priest of another religion. And Monsignor, upon whom a cardinal rested, had moments of strange and horrible insecurity—inexplicable in a religion that explained even disbelief in terms of its own faith: if you doubted the devil it was the devil that made you doubt him. Amory had seen Monsignor go to the houses of stolid philistines, read popular novels furiously, saturate himself in routine, to escape from that horror.	a religion that could even explain away disbelief as part of its own system: if you doubted the existence of the devil, it was the devil influencing you to doubt him.

even disbelief	There was, for example, Thornton Hancock, respected by half the intellectual world as an authority on life, a man who had verified and believed the code he lived by, an educator of educators, an adviser to Presidents—yet Amory knew that this man had, in his heart, leaned on the priest of another religion. And Monsignor, upon whom a cardinal rested, had moments of strange and horrible insecurity—inexplicable in a religion that explained even disbelief in terms of its own faith: if you doubted the devil it was the devil that made you doubt him. Amory had seen Monsignor go to the houses of stolid philistines, read popular novels furiously, saturate himself in routine, to escape from that horror.	even doubting

strange and horrible insecurity	There was, for example, Thornton Hancock, respected by half the intellectual world as an authority on life, a man who had verified and believed the code he lived by, an educator of educators, an adviser to Presidents—yet Amory knew that this man had, in his heart, leaned on the priest of another religion. And Monsignor, upon whom a cardinal rested, had moments of strange and horrible insecurity—inexplicable in a religion that explained even disbelief in terms of its own faith: if you doubted the devil it was the devil that made you doubt him. Amory had seen Monsignor go to the houses of stolid philistines, read popular novels furiously, saturate himself in routine, to escape from that horror.	a weird and awful feeling of being unsafe

go to the houses of stolid philistines, read popular novels furiously, saturate himself in routine, to escape from that horror.	And Monsignor, upon whom a cardinal rested, had moments of strange and horrible insecurity—inexplicable in a religion that explained even disbelief in terms of its own faith: if you doubted the devil it was the devil that made you doubt him. Amory had seen Monsignor go to the houses of stolid philistines, read popular novels furiously, saturate himself in routine, to escape from that horror. And this priest, a little wiser, somewhat purer, had been, Amory knew, not essentially older than he.	visit boring, conventional people, devour popular books, and bury himself in routine to avoid that terror.

stolid philistines	And Monsignor, upon whom a cardinal rested, had moments of strange and horrible insecurity—inexplicable in a religion that explained even disbelief in terms of its own faith: if you doubted the devil it was the devil that made you doubt him. Amory had seen Monsignor go to the houses of stolid philistines, read popular novels furiously, saturate himself in routine, to escape from that horror. And this priest, a little wiser, somewhat purer, had been, Amory knew, not essentially older than he.	boring, uncultured people

priest, a little wiser, somewhat purer, had been, Amory knew, not essentially older than he.	Amory had seen Monsignor go to the houses of stolid philistines, read popular novels furiously, saturate himself in routine, to escape from that horror. And this priest, a little wiser, somewhat purer, had been, Amory knew, not essentially older than he. Amory was alone—he had escaped from a small enclosure into a great labyrinth.	wasn't much older than him, Amory realized, even though he was a bit wiser and more virtuous.

escaped from a small enclosure into a great labyrinth.	And this priest, a little wiser, somewhat purer, had been, Amory knew, not essentially older than he. Amory was alone—he had escaped from a small enclosure into a great labyrinth. He was where Goethe was when he began Faust; he was where Conrad was when he wrote Almayer’s Folly.	escaped from a small, confined space into a vast maze.

a great labyrinth	And this priest, a little wiser, somewhat purer, had been, Amory knew, not essentially older than he. Amory was alone—he had escaped from a small enclosure into a great labyrinth. He was where Goethe was when he began Faust; he was where Conrad was when he wrote Almayer’s Folly.	a huge maze

Almayer’s Folly	Amory was alone—he had escaped from a small enclosure into a great labyrinth. He was where Goethe was when he began Faust; he was where Conrad was when he wrote Almayer’s Folly. Amory said to himself that there were essentially two sorts of people who through natural clarity or disillusion left the enclosure and sought the labyrinth.	Almayer's Folly

was when he wrote Almayer’s Folly.	Amory was alone—he had escaped from a small enclosure into a great labyrinth. He was where Goethe was when he began Faust; he was where Conrad was when he wrote Almayer’s Folly. Amory said to himself that there were essentially two sorts of people who through natural clarity or disillusion left the enclosure and sought the labyrinth.	wrote Almayer's Folly.

sorts of people who through natural clarity or disillusion left the enclosure and sought the labyrinth.	He was where Goethe was when he began Faust; he was where Conrad was when he wrote Almayer’s Folly. Amory said to himself that there were essentially two sorts of people who through natural clarity or disillusion left the enclosure and sought the labyrinth. There were men like Wells and Plato, who had, half unconsciously, a strange, hidden orthodoxy, who would accept for themselves only what could be accepted for all men—incurable romanticists who never, for all their efforts, could enter the labyrinth as stark souls; there were on the other hand sword-like pioneering personalities, Samuel Butler, Renan, Voltaire, who progressed much slower, yet eventually much further, not in the direct pessimistic line of speculative philosophy but concerned in the eternal attempt to attach a positive value to life.	types of people who, because they understood things clearly or were disappointed, left the familiar and entered the unknown.

the direct pessimistic line	Amory said to himself that there were essentially two sorts of people who through natural clarity or disillusion left the enclosure and sought the labyrinth. There were men like Wells and Plato, who had, half unconsciously, a strange, hidden orthodoxy, who would accept for themselves only what could be accepted for all men—incurable romanticists who never, for all their efforts, could enter the labyrinth as stark souls; there were on the other hand sword-like pioneering personalities, Samuel Butler, Renan, Voltaire, who progressed much slower, yet eventually much further, not in the direct pessimistic line of speculative philosophy but concerned in the eternal attempt to attach a positive value to life. Amory stopped.	the straightforwardly negative path

a strange, hidden orthodoxy	Amory said to himself that there were essentially two sorts of people who through natural clarity or disillusion left the enclosure and sought the labyrinth. There were men like Wells and Plato, who had, half unconsciously, a strange, hidden orthodoxy, who would accept for themselves only what could be accepted for all men—incurable romanticists who never, for all their efforts, could enter the labyrinth as stark souls; there were on the other hand sword-like pioneering personalities, Samuel Butler, Renan, Voltaire, who progressed much slower, yet eventually much further, not in the direct pessimistic line of speculative philosophy but concerned in the eternal attempt to attach a positive value to life. Amory stopped.	a secret, conventional way of thinking

the other hand sword-like pioneering personalities	Amory said to himself that there were essentially two sorts of people who through natural clarity or disillusion left the enclosure and sought the labyrinth. There were men like Wells and Plato, who had, half unconsciously, a strange, hidden orthodoxy, who would accept for themselves only what could be accepted for all men—incurable romanticists who never, for all their efforts, could enter the labyrinth as stark souls; there were on the other hand sword-like pioneering personalities, Samuel Butler, Renan, Voltaire, who progressed much slower, yet eventually much further, not in the direct pessimistic line of speculative philosophy but concerned in the eternal attempt to attach a positive value to life. Amory stopped.	On the other hand, there were sharp, adventurous individuals

enter the labyrinth as stark souls; there were on the other hand sword-like pioneering personalities, Samuel Butler, Renan, Voltaire, who progressed much slower, yet eventually much further, not in the direct pessimistic line of speculative philosophy but concerned in the eternal attempt to attach a positive value to life.	Amory said to himself that there were essentially two sorts of people who through natural clarity or disillusion left the enclosure and sought the labyrinth. There were men like Wells and Plato, who had, half unconsciously, a strange, hidden orthodoxy, who would accept for themselves only what could be accepted for all men—incurable romanticists who never, for all their efforts, could enter the labyrinth as stark souls; there were on the other hand sword-like pioneering personalities, Samuel Butler, Renan, Voltaire, who progressed much slower, yet eventually much further, not in the direct pessimistic line of speculative philosophy but concerned in the eternal attempt to attach a positive value to life. Amory stopped.	enter the labyrinth completely unburdened; but then there were also sharp, innovative people like Samuel Butler, Renan, and Voltaire, who advanced more slowly but ultimately went much further, not by focusing on pessimistic theories, but by constantly trying to find meaning and value in life.

stark souls	Amory said to himself that there were essentially two sorts of people who through natural clarity or disillusion left the enclosure and sought the labyrinth. There were men like Wells and Plato, who had, half unconsciously, a strange, hidden orthodoxy, who would accept for themselves only what could be accepted for all men—incurable romanticists who never, for all their efforts, could enter the labyrinth as stark souls; there were on the other hand sword-like pioneering personalities, Samuel Butler, Renan, Voltaire, who progressed much slower, yet eventually much further, not in the direct pessimistic line of speculative philosophy but concerned in the eternal attempt to attach a positive value to life. Amory stopped.	souls stripped bare

incurable romanticists	Amory said to himself that there were essentially two sorts of people who through natural clarity or disillusion left the enclosure and sought the labyrinth. There were men like Wells and Plato, who had, half unconsciously, a strange, hidden orthodoxy, who would accept for themselves only what could be accepted for all men—incurable romanticists who never, for all their efforts, could enter the labyrinth as stark souls; there were on the other hand sword-like pioneering personalities, Samuel Butler, Renan, Voltaire, who progressed much slower, yet eventually much further, not in the direct pessimistic line of speculative philosophy but concerned in the eternal attempt to attach a positive value to life. Amory stopped.	hopeless romantics

speculative philosophy	Amory said to himself that there were essentially two sorts of people who through natural clarity or disillusion left the enclosure and sought the labyrinth. There were men like Wells and Plato, who had, half unconsciously, a strange, hidden orthodoxy, who would accept for themselves only what could be accepted for all men—incurable romanticists who never, for all their efforts, could enter the labyrinth as stark souls; there were on the other hand sword-like pioneering personalities, Samuel Butler, Renan, Voltaire, who progressed much slower, yet eventually much further, not in the direct pessimistic line of speculative philosophy but concerned in the eternal attempt to attach a positive value to life. Amory stopped.	philosophical theories

a strong distrust	Amory stopped. He began for the first time in his life to have a strong distrust of all generalities and epigrams. They were too easy, too dangerous to the public mind.	a deep suspicion

time in his life to have a strong distrust of all generalities and epigrams.	Amory stopped. He began for the first time in his life to have a strong distrust of all generalities and epigrams. They were too easy, too dangerous to the public mind.	to strongly distrust general ideas and clever sayings.

reached the public after thirty years in some such form: Benson and Chesterton had popularized Huysmans and Newman; Shaw had sugarcoated Nietzsche and Ibsen and Schopenhauer.	They were too easy, too dangerous to the public mind. Yet all thought usually reached the public after thirty years in some such form: Benson and Chesterton had popularized Huysmans and Newman; Shaw had sugarcoated Nietzsche and Ibsen and Schopenhauer. The man in the street heard the conclusions of dead genius through someone else’s clever paradoxes and didactic epigrams.	usually took about thirty years to become popular: writers like Benson and Chesterton made Huysmans and Newman well-known; Shaw made Nietzsche, Ibsen, and Schopenhauer more appealing.

conclusions of dead genius through someone else’s clever paradoxes and didactic epigrams.	Yet all thought usually reached the public after thirty years in some such form: Benson and Chesterton had popularized Huysmans and Newman; Shaw had sugarcoated Nietzsche and Ibsen and Schopenhauer. The man in the street heard the conclusions of dead genius through someone else’s clever paradoxes and didactic epigrams. Life was a damned muddle.	ideas of brilliant thinkers who are no longer alive, presented through other people's smart and preachy sayings.

didactic epigrams	Yet all thought usually reached the public after thirty years in some such form: Benson and Chesterton had popularized Huysmans and Newman; Shaw had sugarcoated Nietzsche and Ibsen and Schopenhauer. The man in the street heard the conclusions of dead genius through someone else’s clever paradoxes and didactic epigrams. Life was a damned muddle.	teaching sayings

a damned muddle	The man in the street heard the conclusions of dead genius through someone else’s clever paradoxes and didactic epigrams. Life was a damned muddle. a football game with everyone offside and the referee gotten rid of—everyone claiming the referee would have been on his side.	a confusing mess

rushing wildly back, shouting that they had found it.	Progress was a labyrinth. people plunging blindly in and then rushing wildly back, shouting that they had found it. the invisible king—the élan vital—the principle of evolution.	running back excitedly, claiming they had found it.

king—the élan vital—the principle of evolution.	people plunging blindly in and then rushing wildly back, shouting that they had found it. the invisible king—the élan vital—the principle of evolution. writing a book, starting a war, founding a school.	king—the life force—the reason things evolve.

a selfish man	writing a book, starting a war, founding a school. Amory, even had he not been a selfish man, would have started all inquiries with himself. He was his own best example—sitting in the rain, a human creature of sex and pride, foiled by chance and his own temperament of the balm of love and children, preserved to help in building up the living consciousness of the race.	a self-centered man

sitting in the rain, a human creature of sex and pride, foiled by chance and his own temperament of the balm of love and children, preserved to help in building up the living consciousness of the race.	Amory, even had he not been a selfish man, would have started all inquiries with himself. He was his own best example—sitting in the rain, a human creature of sex and pride, foiled by chance and his own temperament of the balm of love and children, preserved to help in building up the living consciousness of the race. In self-reproach and loneliness and disillusion he came to the entrance of the labyrinth.	sitting in the rain, a person driven by desire and ego, denied love and family by fate and his own nature, kept alive to contribute to the ongoing awareness of humanity.

entrance of the labyrinth.	He was his own best example—sitting in the rain, a human creature of sex and pride, foiled by chance and his own temperament of the balm of love and children, preserved to help in building up the living consciousness of the race. In self-reproach and loneliness and disillusion he came to the entrance of the labyrinth. Another dawn flung itself across the river, a belated taxi hurried along the street, its lamps still shining like burning eyes in a face white from a night’s carouse.	the beginning of his troubles.

a night’s carouse	In self-reproach and loneliness and disillusion he came to the entrance of the labyrinth. Another dawn flung itself across the river, a belated taxi hurried along the street, its lamps still shining like burning eyes in a face white from a night’s carouse. A melancholy siren sounded far down the river.	a night of heavy drinking and partying

a belated taxi	In self-reproach and loneliness and disillusion he came to the entrance of the labyrinth. Another dawn flung itself across the river, a belated taxi hurried along the street, its lamps still shining like burning eyes in a face white from a night’s carouse. A melancholy siren sounded far down the river.	a late taxi

shining like burning eyes in a face white from a night’s carouse.	In self-reproach and loneliness and disillusion he came to the entrance of the labyrinth. Another dawn flung itself across the river, a belated taxi hurried along the street, its lamps still shining like burning eyes in a face white from a night’s carouse. A melancholy siren sounded far down the river.	shining like burning eyes in a face pale from a night of partying.

A melancholy siren	Another dawn flung itself across the river, a belated taxi hurried along the street, its lamps still shining like burning eyes in a face white from a night’s carouse. A melancholy siren sounded far down the river.	A sad siren.

sounded far down the river.	Another dawn flung itself across the river, a belated taxi hurried along the street, its lamps still shining like burning eyes in a face white from a night’s carouse. A melancholy siren sounded far down the river.	It echoed from far down the river.

solemn high mass	It was magnificently Catholic and liturgical. Bishop O’Neill sang solemn high mass and the cardinal gave the final absolutions. Thornton Hancock, Mrs. Lawrence, the British and Italian ambassadors, the papal delegate, and a host of friends and priests were there—yet the inexorable shears had cut through all these threads that Monsignor had gathered into his hands.	A formal and elaborate Catholic Mass

the final absolutions	It was magnificently Catholic and liturgical. Bishop O’Neill sang solemn high mass and the cardinal gave the final absolutions. Thornton Hancock, Mrs. Lawrence, the British and Italian ambassadors, the papal delegate, and a host of friends and priests were there—yet the inexorable shears had cut through all these threads that Monsignor had gathered into his hands.	final forgiveness of sins

the British and Italian ambassadors	Bishop O’Neill sang solemn high mass and the cardinal gave the final absolutions. Thornton Hancock, Mrs. Lawrence, the British and Italian ambassadors, the papal delegate, and a host of friends and priests were there—yet the inexorable shears had cut through all these threads that Monsignor had gathered into his hands. To Amory it was a haunting grief to see him lying in his coffin, with closed hands upon his purple vestments.	the British and Italian ambassadors

the papal delegate	Bishop O’Neill sang solemn high mass and the cardinal gave the final absolutions. Thornton Hancock, Mrs. Lawrence, the British and Italian ambassadors, the papal delegate, and a host of friends and priests were there—yet the inexorable shears had cut through all these threads that Monsignor had gathered into his hands. To Amory it was a haunting grief to see him lying in his coffin, with closed hands upon his purple vestments.	The Pope's representative

the inexorable shears	Bishop O’Neill sang solemn high mass and the cardinal gave the final absolutions. Thornton Hancock, Mrs. Lawrence, the British and Italian ambassadors, the papal delegate, and a host of friends and priests were there—yet the inexorable shears had cut through all these threads that Monsignor had gathered into his hands. To Amory it was a haunting grief to see him lying in his coffin, with closed hands upon his purple vestments.	death

his purple vestments	Thornton Hancock, Mrs. Lawrence, the British and Italian ambassadors, the papal delegate, and a host of friends and priests were there—yet the inexorable shears had cut through all these threads that Monsignor had gathered into his hands. To Amory it was a haunting grief to see him lying in his coffin, with closed hands upon his purple vestments. His face had not changed, and, as he never knew he was dying, it showed no pain or fear.	his purple robes

a haunting grief	Thornton Hancock, Mrs. Lawrence, the British and Italian ambassadors, the papal delegate, and a host of friends and priests were there—yet the inexorable shears had cut through all these threads that Monsignor had gathered into his hands. To Amory it was a haunting grief to see him lying in his coffin, with closed hands upon his purple vestments. His face had not changed, and, as he never knew he was dying, it showed no pain or fear.	a deeply sad feeling

lying in his coffin, with closed hands upon his purple vestments.	Thornton Hancock, Mrs. Lawrence, the British and Italian ambassadors, the papal delegate, and a host of friends and priests were there—yet the inexorable shears had cut through all these threads that Monsignor had gathered into his hands. To Amory it was a haunting grief to see him lying in his coffin, with closed hands upon his purple vestments. His face had not changed, and, as he never knew he was dying, it showed no pain or fear.	lying in his coffin, his hands folded on his purple robes.

Amory’s dear old friend	His face had not changed, and, as he never knew he was dying, it showed no pain or fear. It was Amory’s dear old friend, his and the others’—for the church was full of people with daft, staring faces, the most exalted seeming the most stricken. The cardinal, like an archangel in cope and mitre, sprinkled the holy water; the organ broke into sound; the choir began to sing the “Requiem Eternam.”	Amory's beloved old friend.

daft, staring faces	His face had not changed, and, as he never knew he was dying, it showed no pain or fear. It was Amory’s dear old friend, his and the others’—for the church was full of people with daft, staring faces, the most exalted seeming the most stricken. The cardinal, like an archangel in cope and mitre, sprinkled the holy water; the organ broke into sound; the choir began to sing the “Requiem Eternam.”	foolish, blank faces

people with daft, staring faces, the most exalted seeming the most stricken.	His face had not changed, and, as he never knew he was dying, it showed no pain or fear. It was Amory’s dear old friend, his and the others’—for the church was full of people with daft, staring faces, the most exalted seeming the most stricken. The cardinal, like an archangel in cope and mitre, sprinkled the holy water; the organ broke into sound; the choir began to sing the “Requiem Eternam.”	people with foolish, blank expressions, the most important seeming the most grief-stricken.

archangel in cope and mitre, sprinkled the holy water; the organ broke into sound; the choir began to sing the “Requiem Eternam.”	It was Amory’s dear old friend, his and the others’—for the church was full of people with daft, staring faces, the most exalted seeming the most stricken. The cardinal, like an archangel in cope and mitre, sprinkled the holy water; the organ broke into sound; the choir began to sing the “Requiem Eternam.” All these people grieved because they had to some extent depended upon Monsignor.	like an archangel in robes and a tall hat, sprinkled holy water; the organ started playing; the choir began singing the "Eternal Rest" song.

the “Requiem Eternam	It was Amory’s dear old friend, his and the others’—for the church was full of people with daft, staring faces, the most exalted seeming the most stricken. The cardinal, like an archangel in cope and mitre, sprinkled the holy water; the organ broke into sound; the choir began to sing the “Requiem Eternam.” All these people grieved because they had to some extent depended upon Monsignor.	Eternal rest.

depended upon Monsignor.	The cardinal, like an archangel in cope and mitre, sprinkled the holy water; the organ broke into sound; the choir began to sing the “Requiem Eternam.” All these people grieved because they had to some extent depended upon Monsignor. Their grief was more than sentiment for the “crack in his voice or a certain break in his walk,” as Wells put it.	relied on Monsignor.

break in his walk,” as Wells put it.	All these people grieved because they had to some extent depended upon Monsignor. Their grief was more than sentiment for the “crack in his voice or a certain break in his walk,” as Wells put it. These people had leaned on Monsignor’s faith, his way of finding cheer, of making religion a thing of lights and shadows, making all light and shadow merely aspects of God.	the way he limped," as Wells said.

Monsignor’s faith	Their grief was more than sentiment for the “crack in his voice or a certain break in his walk,” as Wells put it. These people had leaned on Monsignor’s faith, his way of finding cheer, of making religion a thing of lights and shadows, making all light and shadow merely aspects of God. People felt safe when he was near.	The priest's faith

finding cheer, of making religion a thing of lights and shadows, making all light and shadow merely aspects of God.	Their grief was more than sentiment for the “crack in his voice or a certain break in his walk,” as Wells put it. These people had leaned on Monsignor’s faith, his way of finding cheer, of making religion a thing of lights and shadows, making all light and shadow merely aspects of God. People felt safe when he was near.	finding happiness, of showing religion as both good and bad, and that both good and bad are just parts of God.

Amory’s attempted sacrifice	People felt safe when he was near. Of Amory’s attempted sacrifice had been born merely the full realization of his disillusion, but of Monsignor’s funeral was born the romantic elf who was to enter the labyrinth with him. He found something that he wanted, had always wanted and always would want—not to be admired, as he had feared; not to be loved, as he had made himself believe; but to be necessary to people, to be indispensable; he remembered the sense of security he had found in Burne.	Amory's attempt to give something up.

the full realization	People felt safe when he was near. Of Amory’s attempted sacrifice had been born merely the full realization of his disillusion, but of Monsignor’s funeral was born the romantic elf who was to enter the labyrinth with him. He found something that he wanted, had always wanted and always would want—not to be admired, as he had feared; not to be loved, as he had made himself believe; but to be necessary to people, to be indispensable; he remembered the sense of security he had found in Burne.	complete understanding

funeral was born the romantic elf who was to enter the labyrinth with him.	People felt safe when he was near. Of Amory’s attempted sacrifice had been born merely the full realization of his disillusion, but of Monsignor’s funeral was born the romantic elf who was to enter the labyrinth with him. He found something that he wanted, had always wanted and always would want—not to be admired, as he had feared; not to be loved, as he had made himself believe; but to be necessary to people, to be indispensable; he remembered the sense of security he had found in Burne.	His experience at the funeral awakened a romantic side of him that would share his complicated journey.

the romantic elf	People felt safe when he was near. Of Amory’s attempted sacrifice had been born merely the full realization of his disillusion, but of Monsignor’s funeral was born the romantic elf who was to enter the labyrinth with him. He found something that he wanted, had always wanted and always would want—not to be admired, as he had feared; not to be loved, as he had made himself believe; but to be necessary to people, to be indispensable; he remembered the sense of security he had found in Burne.	The part of him that wanted to connect with people.

found in Burne.	Of Amory’s attempted sacrifice had been born merely the full realization of his disillusion, but of Monsignor’s funeral was born the romantic elf who was to enter the labyrinth with him. He found something that he wanted, had always wanted and always would want—not to be admired, as he had feared; not to be loved, as he had made himself believe; but to be necessary to people, to be indispensable; he remembered the sense of security he had found in Burne. Life opened up in one of its amazing bursts of radiance and Amory suddenly and permanently rejected an old epigram that had been playing listlessly in his mind: “Very few things matter and nothing matters very much.”	found in Burne.

one of its amazing bursts of radiance and Amory suddenly and permanently rejected an old epigram that had been playing listlessly in his mind: “Very few things matter and nothing matters very much.”	He found something that he wanted, had always wanted and always would want—not to be admired, as he had feared; not to be loved, as he had made himself believe; but to be necessary to people, to be indispensable; he remembered the sense of security he had found in Burne. Life opened up in one of its amazing bursts of radiance and Amory suddenly and permanently rejected an old epigram that had been playing listlessly in his mind: “Very few things matter and nothing matters very much.” On the contrary, Amory felt an immense desire to give people a sense of security.	a moment of sudden clarity, and Amory completely rejected a saying he'd been idly thinking about: "Very few things matter, and nothing matters very much."

an old epigram	He found something that he wanted, had always wanted and always would want—not to be admired, as he had feared; not to be loved, as he had made himself believe; but to be necessary to people, to be indispensable; he remembered the sense of security he had found in Burne. Life opened up in one of its amazing bursts of radiance and Amory suddenly and permanently rejected an old epigram that had been playing listlessly in his mind: “Very few things matter and nothing matters very much.” On the contrary, Amory felt an immense desire to give people a sense of security.	an old saying

an immense desire	Life opened up in one of its amazing bursts of radiance and Amory suddenly and permanently rejected an old epigram that had been playing listlessly in his mind: “Very few things matter and nothing matters very much.” On the contrary, Amory felt an immense desire to give people a sense of security.	a strong wish

desire to give people a sense of security.	Life opened up in one of its amazing bursts of radiance and Amory suddenly and permanently rejected an old epigram that had been playing listlessly in his mind: “Very few things matter and nothing matters very much.” On the contrary, Amory felt an immense desire to give people a sense of security.	wanting to make people feel safe.

a colorless vault	On the day that Amory started on his walk to Princeton the sky was a colorless vault, cool, high and barren of the threat of rain. It was a gray day, that least fleshly of all weathers; a day of dreams and far hopes and clear visions.	a sky with no color

day of dreams and far hopes and clear visions.	On the day that Amory started on his walk to Princeton the sky was a colorless vault, cool, high and barren of the threat of rain. It was a gray day, that least fleshly of all weathers; a day of dreams and far hopes and clear visions. It was a day easily associated with those abstract truths and purities that dissolve in the sunshine or fade out in mocking laughter by the light of the moon.	a day for dreaming, hoping for the future, and seeing things clearly.

associated with those abstract truths and purities that dissolve in the sunshine or fade out in mocking laughter by the light of the moon.	It was a gray day, that least fleshly of all weathers; a day of dreams and far hopes and clear visions. It was a day easily associated with those abstract truths and purities that dissolve in the sunshine or fade out in mocking laughter by the light of the moon. The trees and clouds were carved in classical severity; the sounds of the countryside had harmonized to a monotone, metallic as a trumpet, breathless as the Grecian urn.	linked to pure, ideal concepts that disappear in good times or become ridiculous when things are bad.

sounds of the countryside had harmonized to a monotone, metallic as a trumpet, breathless as the Grecian urn.	It was a day easily associated with those abstract truths and purities that dissolve in the sunshine or fade out in mocking laughter by the light of the moon. The trees and clouds were carved in classical severity; the sounds of the countryside had harmonized to a monotone, metallic as a trumpet, breathless as the Grecian urn. The day had put Amory in such a contemplative mood that he caused much annoyance to several motorists who were forced to slow up considerably or else run him down.	The sounds of the countryside blended into a single, unchanging tone, as sharp as a trumpet and as still as an ancient Greek vase.

the Grecian urn	It was a day easily associated with those abstract truths and purities that dissolve in the sunshine or fade out in mocking laughter by the light of the moon. The trees and clouds were carved in classical severity; the sounds of the countryside had harmonized to a monotone, metallic as a trumpet, breathless as the Grecian urn. The day had put Amory in such a contemplative mood that he caused much annoyance to several motorists who were forced to slow up considerably or else run him down.	a Greek vase

classical severity	It was a day easily associated with those abstract truths and purities that dissolve in the sunshine or fade out in mocking laughter by the light of the moon. The trees and clouds were carved in classical severity; the sounds of the countryside had harmonized to a monotone, metallic as a trumpet, breathless as the Grecian urn. The day had put Amory in such a contemplative mood that he caused much annoyance to several motorists who were forced to slow up considerably or else run him down.	simple and strict

several motorists	The trees and clouds were carved in classical severity; the sounds of the countryside had harmonized to a monotone, metallic as a trumpet, breathless as the Grecian urn. The day had put Amory in such a contemplative mood that he caused much annoyance to several motorists who were forced to slow up considerably or else run him down. So engrossed in his thoughts was he that he was scarcely surprised at that strange phenomenon—cordiality manifested within fifty miles of Manhattan—when a passing car slowed down beside him and a voice hailed him.	some drivers

such a contemplative mood	The trees and clouds were carved in classical severity; the sounds of the countryside had harmonized to a monotone, metallic as a trumpet, breathless as the Grecian urn. The day had put Amory in such a contemplative mood that he caused much annoyance to several motorists who were forced to slow up considerably or else run him down. So engrossed in his thoughts was he that he was scarcely surprised at that strange phenomenon—cordiality manifested within fifty miles of Manhattan—when a passing car slowed down beside him and a voice hailed him.	a thoughtful mood

much annoyance	The trees and clouds were carved in classical severity; the sounds of the countryside had harmonized to a monotone, metallic as a trumpet, breathless as the Grecian urn. The day had put Amory in such a contemplative mood that he caused much annoyance to several motorists who were forced to slow up considerably or else run him down. So engrossed in his thoughts was he that he was scarcely surprised at that strange phenomenon—cordiality manifested within fifty miles of Manhattan—when a passing car slowed down beside him and a voice hailed him.	annoyed many people

motorists who were forced to slow up considerably or else run him down.	The trees and clouds were carved in classical severity; the sounds of the countryside had harmonized to a monotone, metallic as a trumpet, breathless as the Grecian urn. The day had put Amory in such a contemplative mood that he caused much annoyance to several motorists who were forced to slow up considerably or else run him down. So engrossed in his thoughts was he that he was scarcely surprised at that strange phenomenon—cordiality manifested within fifty miles of Manhattan—when a passing car slowed down beside him and a voice hailed him.	drivers who had to slow down a lot or hit him.

cordiality manifested within fifty miles of Manhattan—when a passing car slowed down beside him and a voice hailed him.	The day had put Amory in such a contemplative mood that he caused much annoyance to several motorists who were forced to slow up considerably or else run him down. So engrossed in his thoughts was he that he was scarcely surprised at that strange phenomenon—cordiality manifested within fifty miles of Manhattan—when a passing car slowed down beside him and a voice hailed him. He looked up and saw a magnificent Locomobile in which sat two middle-aged men, one of them small and anxious looking, apparently an artificial growth on the other who was large and begoggled and imposing.	friendliness appearing so close to New York City—when a car slowed down and someone called out to him.

a magnificent Locomobile	So engrossed in his thoughts was he that he was scarcely surprised at that strange phenomenon—cordiality manifested within fifty miles of Manhattan—when a passing car slowed down beside him and a voice hailed him. He looked up and saw a magnificent Locomobile in which sat two middle-aged men, one of them small and anxious looking, apparently an artificial growth on the other who was large and begoggled and imposing. “Do you want a lift?” asked the apparently artificial growth, glancing from the corner of his eye at the imposing man as if for some habitual, silent corroboration.	a fancy car

sat two middle-aged men, one of them small and anxious looking, apparently an artificial growth on the other who was large and begoggled and imposing.	So engrossed in his thoughts was he that he was scarcely surprised at that strange phenomenon—cordiality manifested within fifty miles of Manhattan—when a passing car slowed down beside him and a voice hailed him. He looked up and saw a magnificent Locomobile in which sat two middle-aged men, one of them small and anxious looking, apparently an artificial growth on the other who was large and begoggled and imposing. “Do you want a lift?” asked the apparently artificial growth, glancing from the corner of his eye at the imposing man as if for some habitual, silent corroboration.	were two middle-aged men. One was small and anxious, seemingly dwarfed by the other, who was large, wearing goggles, and looked important.

some habitual, silent corroboration	He looked up and saw a magnificent Locomobile in which sat two middle-aged men, one of them small and anxious looking, apparently an artificial growth on the other who was large and begoggled and imposing. “Do you want a lift?” asked the apparently artificial growth, glancing from the corner of his eye at the imposing man as if for some habitual, silent corroboration. “You bet I do.	a silent nod of approval

glancing from the corner of his eye at the imposing man as if for some habitual, silent corroboration.	He looked up and saw a magnificent Locomobile in which sat two middle-aged men, one of them small and anxious looking, apparently an artificial growth on the other who was large and begoggled and imposing. “Do you want a lift?” asked the apparently artificial growth, glancing from the corner of his eye at the imposing man as if for some habitual, silent corroboration. “You bet I do.	looking at the imposing man out of the corner of his eye, as if needing his silent approval.

settled himself in the middle of the back seat.	Thanks.” The chauffeur swung open the door, and, climbing in, Amory settled himself in the middle of the back seat. He took in his companions curiously.	sat in the middle of the back seat.

confidence in himself set off against a tremendous boredom with everything around him.	He took in his companions curiously. The chief characteristic of the big man seemed to be a great confidence in himself set off against a tremendous boredom with everything around him. That part of his face which protruded under the goggles was what is generally termed “strong”; rolls of not undignified fat had collected near his chin; somewhere above was a wide thin mouth and the rough model for a Roman nose, and, below, his shoulders collapsed without a struggle into the powerful bulk of his chest and belly.	He seemed very confident but also incredibly bored.

a tremendous boredom	He took in his companions curiously. The chief characteristic of the big man seemed to be a great confidence in himself set off against a tremendous boredom with everything around him. That part of his face which protruded under the goggles was what is generally termed “strong”; rolls of not undignified fat had collected near his chin; somewhere above was a wide thin mouth and the rough model for a Roman nose, and, below, his shoulders collapsed without a struggle into the powerful bulk of his chest and belly.	extreme boredom

not undignified fat	The chief characteristic of the big man seemed to be a great confidence in himself set off against a tremendous boredom with everything around him. That part of his face which protruded under the goggles was what is generally termed “strong”; rolls of not undignified fat had collected near his chin; somewhere above was a wide thin mouth and the rough model for a Roman nose, and, below, his shoulders collapsed without a struggle into the powerful bulk of his chest and belly. He was excellently and quietly dressed.	acceptable or respectable fat

rolls of not undignified fat had collected near his chin; somewhere above was a wide thin mouth and the rough model for a Roman nose, and, below, his shoulders collapsed without a struggle into the powerful bulk of his chest and belly.	The chief characteristic of the big man seemed to be a great confidence in himself set off against a tremendous boredom with everything around him. That part of his face which protruded under the goggles was what is generally termed “strong”; rolls of not undignified fat had collected near his chin; somewhere above was a wide thin mouth and the rough model for a Roman nose, and, below, his shoulders collapsed without a struggle into the powerful bulk of his chest and belly. He was excellently and quietly dressed.	He had rolls of fat around his chin that weren't unattractive; above that was a wide, thin mouth and a roughly shaped Roman nose, and below, his shoulders sloped easily into his large chest and stomach.

speculating steadily but hopelessly some baffling hirsute problem.	He was excellently and quietly dressed. Amory noticed that he was inclined to stare straight at the back of the chauffeur’s head as if speculating steadily but hopelessly some baffling hirsute problem. The smaller man was remarkable only for his complete submersion in the personality of the other.	thinking intently but without hope about a puzzling hair-related question.

some baffling hirsute problem	He was excellently and quietly dressed. Amory noticed that he was inclined to stare straight at the back of the chauffeur’s head as if speculating steadily but hopelessly some baffling hirsute problem. The smaller man was remarkable only for his complete submersion in the personality of the other.	some confusing hair problem

the chauffeur’s head	He was excellently and quietly dressed. Amory noticed that he was inclined to stare straight at the back of the chauffeur’s head as if speculating steadily but hopelessly some baffling hirsute problem. The smaller man was remarkable only for his complete submersion in the personality of the other.	the driver's head

submersion in the personality of the other.	Amory noticed that he was inclined to stare straight at the back of the chauffeur’s head as if speculating steadily but hopelessly some baffling hirsute problem. The smaller man was remarkable only for his complete submersion in the personality of the other. He was of that lower secretarial type who at forty have engraved upon their business cards: “Assistant to the President,” and without a sigh consecrate the rest of their lives to secondhand mannerisms.	completely absorbed in the other person's identity.

his complete submersion	Amory noticed that he was inclined to stare straight at the back of the chauffeur’s head as if speculating steadily but hopelessly some baffling hirsute problem. The smaller man was remarkable only for his complete submersion in the personality of the other. He was of that lower secretarial type who at forty have engraved upon their business cards: “Assistant to the President,” and without a sigh consecrate the rest of their lives to secondhand mannerisms.	being completely absorbed

that lower secretarial type	The smaller man was remarkable only for his complete submersion in the personality of the other. He was of that lower secretarial type who at forty have engraved upon their business cards: “Assistant to the President,” and without a sigh consecrate the rest of their lives to secondhand mannerisms. “Going far?” asked the smaller man in a pleasant disinterested way.	the kind of secretary who is clearly less important

rest of their lives to secondhand mannerisms.	The smaller man was remarkable only for his complete submersion in the personality of the other. He was of that lower secretarial type who at forty have engraved upon their business cards: “Assistant to the President,” and without a sigh consecrate the rest of their lives to secondhand mannerisms. “Going far?” asked the smaller man in a pleasant disinterested way.	spend the rest of their lives imitating others.

secondhand mannerisms	The smaller man was remarkable only for his complete submersion in the personality of the other. He was of that lower secretarial type who at forty have engraved upon their business cards: “Assistant to the President,” and without a sigh consecrate the rest of their lives to secondhand mannerisms. “Going far?” asked the smaller man in a pleasant disinterested way.	copying someone else's behavior

asked the smaller man in a pleasant disinterested way.	He was of that lower secretarial type who at forty have engraved upon their business cards: “Assistant to the President,” and without a sigh consecrate the rest of their lives to secondhand mannerisms. “Going far?” asked the smaller man in a pleasant disinterested way. “Quite a stretch.”	the smaller man asked, sounding friendly but not really interested.

a pleasant disinterested way	He was of that lower secretarial type who at forty have engraved upon their business cards: “Assistant to the President,” and without a sigh consecrate the rest of their lives to secondhand mannerisms. “Going far?” asked the smaller man in a pleasant disinterested way. “Quite a stretch.”	a friendly, uninterested way

Hiking for exercise?”	“Quite a stretch.” “Hiking for exercise?” “No,” responded Amory succinctly, “I’m walking because I can’t afford to ride.”	Walking for exercise?

walking because I can’t afford to ride.”	“Hiking for exercise?” “No,” responded Amory succinctly, “I’m walking because I can’t afford to ride.” “Oh.”	walking because I can't afford transportation."

’s lots of work,” he continued rather testily.	Then again: “Are you looking for work? Because there’s lots of work,” he continued rather testily. “All this talk of lack of work.	There's plenty of work," he said, sounding annoyed.

expressed the West with a sweeping, lateral gesture.	The West is especially short of labor.” He expressed the West with a sweeping, lateral gesture. Amory nodded politely.	gestured broadly to indicate the West.

a sweeping, lateral gesture	The West is especially short of labor.” He expressed the West with a sweeping, lateral gesture. Amory nodded politely.	a broad, sideways motion

agree wisely with something Amory had said, “now is the time of opportunity and business openings.”	No—Amory was not a clerk. “Whatever your line is,” said the little man, seeming to agree wisely with something Amory had said, “now is the time of opportunity and business openings.” He glanced again toward the big man, as a lawyer grilling a witness glances involuntarily at the jury.	seemed to agree with something Amory said, "now is a good time for chances and new businesses."

lawyer grilling a witness glances involuntarily at the jury.	“Whatever your line is,” said the little man, seeming to agree wisely with something Amory had said, “now is the time of opportunity and business openings.” He glanced again toward the big man, as a lawyer grilling a witness glances involuntarily at the jury. Amory decided that he must say something and for the life of him could think of only one thing to say.	a lawyer questioning a witness looks without thinking at the jury.

lot of money—” The little man laughed mirthlessly but conscientiously.	Amory decided that he must say something and for the life of him could think of only one thing to say. “Of course I want a great lot of money—” The little man laughed mirthlessly but conscientiously. “That’s what everyone wants nowadays, but they don’t want to work for it.”	"A lot of money" The little man laughed without joy, but like he was obligated to.

“A very natural, healthy desire	“That’s what everyone wants nowadays, but they don’t want to work for it.” “A very natural, healthy desire. Almost all normal people want to be rich without great effort—except the financiers in problem plays, who want to ‘crash their way through.’	That's a normal, healthy wish.

be rich without great effort—except the financiers in problem plays, who want to ‘crash their way through.’	“A very natural, healthy desire. Almost all normal people want to be rich without great effort—except the financiers in problem plays, who want to ‘crash their way through.’ Don’t you want easy money?”	get rich easily—unlike the characters in serious dramas who are ruthless in their pursuit of wealth.

contemplating socialism as possibly my forte.”	“Of course not,” said the secretary indignantly. “But,” continued Amory disregarding him, “being very poor at present I am contemplating socialism as possibly my forte.” Both men glanced at him curiously.	thinking about socialism as something I might be good at.

possibly my forte	“Of course not,” said the secretary indignantly. “But,” continued Amory disregarding him, “being very poor at present I am contemplating socialism as possibly my forte.” Both men glanced at him curiously.	maybe what I'm good at

glanced at him curiously.	“But,” continued Amory disregarding him, “being very poor at present I am contemplating socialism as possibly my forte.” Both men glanced at him curiously. “These bomb throwers—” The little man ceased as words lurched ponderously from the big man’s chest.	looked at him with interest.

These bomb throwers	Both men glanced at him curiously. “These bomb throwers—” The little man ceased as words lurched ponderously from the big man’s chest. “If I thought you were a bomb thrower I’d run you over to the Newark jail.	These people who throw bombs.

lurched ponderously from the big man’s chest.	Both men glanced at him curiously. “These bomb throwers—” The little man ceased as words lurched ponderously from the big man’s chest. “If I thought you were a bomb thrower I’d run you over to the Newark jail.	came out of the big man's chest slowly and heavily.

the big man’s chest	Both men glanced at him curiously. “These bomb throwers—” The little man ceased as words lurched ponderously from the big man’s chest. “If I thought you were a bomb thrower I’d run you over to the Newark jail.	the big man

a bomb thrower	“These bomb throwers—” The little man ceased as words lurched ponderously from the big man’s chest. “If I thought you were a bomb thrower I’d run you over to the Newark jail. That’s what I think of Socialists.”	someone who uses bombs, or someone with radical, violent political views.

think of Socialists.”	“If I thought you were a bomb thrower I’d run you over to the Newark jail. That’s what I think of Socialists.” Amory laughed.	That's what I think of Socialists.

Bolsheviks, one of these idealists?	Amory laughed. “What are you,” asked the big man, “one of these parlor Bolsheviks, one of these idealists? I must say I fail to see the difference.	Bolsheviks, one of those idealists?

these parlor Bolsheviks	Amory laughed. “What are you,” asked the big man, “one of these parlor Bolsheviks, one of these idealists? I must say I fail to see the difference.	Armchair revolutionaries

stuff that stirs up the poor immigrants.”	I must say I fail to see the difference. The idealists loaf around and write the stuff that stirs up the poor immigrants.” “Well,” said Amory, “if being an idealist is both safe and lucrative, I might try it.”	things that get the poor immigrants riled up.

the poor immigrants	I must say I fail to see the difference. The idealists loaf around and write the stuff that stirs up the poor immigrants.” “Well,” said Amory, “if being an idealist is both safe and lucrative, I might try it.”	poor immigrants

is both safe and lucrative, I might try it.”	The idealists loaf around and write the stuff that stirs up the poor immigrants.” “Well,” said Amory, “if being an idealist is both safe and lucrative, I might try it.” “What’s your difficulty?	is both safe and profitable, I might try it.

copy for an advertising agency.”	“What was it?” “Writing copy for an advertising agency.” “Lots of money in advertising.”	Writing ads for an advertising company.

Lots of money in advertising.”	“Writing copy for an advertising agency.” “Lots of money in advertising.” Amory smiled discreetly.	Advertising pays well.

hash out ragtime for your theatres.	Even art gets enough to eat these days. Artists draw your magazine covers, write your advertisements, hash out ragtime for your theatres. By the great commercializing of printing you’ve found a harmless, polite occupation for every genius who might have carved his own niche.	play ragtime music for your theaters.

the great commercializing	Artists draw your magazine covers, write your advertisements, hash out ragtime for your theatres. By the great commercializing of printing you’ve found a harmless, polite occupation for every genius who might have carved his own niche. But beware the artist who’s an intellectual also.	the rise of commercialism

a harmless, polite occupation	Artists draw your magazine covers, write your advertisements, hash out ragtime for your theatres. By the great commercializing of printing you’ve found a harmless, polite occupation for every genius who might have carved his own niche. But beware the artist who’s an intellectual also.	a safe, respectable job

found a harmless, polite occupation for every genius who might have carved his own niche.	Artists draw your magazine covers, write your advertisements, hash out ragtime for your theatres. By the great commercializing of printing you’ve found a harmless, polite occupation for every genius who might have carved his own niche. But beware the artist who’s an intellectual also.	given every talented person a safe, respectable job instead of letting them forge their own path.

his own niche	Artists draw your magazine covers, write your advertisements, hash out ragtime for your theatres. By the great commercializing of printing you’ve found a harmless, polite occupation for every genius who might have carved his own niche. But beware the artist who’s an intellectual also.	their own unique place

artist who’s an intellectual also.	By the great commercializing of printing you’ve found a harmless, polite occupation for every genius who might have carved his own niche. But beware the artist who’s an intellectual also. The artist who doesn’t fit—the Rousseau, the Tolstoy, the Samuel Butler, the Amory Blaine—” “Who’s he?” demanded the little man suspiciously.	an artist who is also intelligent.

the Amory Blaine	But beware the artist who’s an intellectual also. The artist who doesn’t fit—the Rousseau, the Tolstoy, the Samuel Butler, the Amory Blaine—” “Who’s he?” demanded the little man suspiciously. “Well,” said Amory, “he’s a—he’s an intellectual personage not very well known at present.”	Amory Blaine

Butler, the Amory Blaine—” “Who’s he?” demanded the little man suspiciously.	But beware the artist who’s an intellectual also. The artist who doesn’t fit—the Rousseau, the Tolstoy, the Samuel Butler, the Amory Blaine—” “Who’s he?” demanded the little man suspiciously. “Well,” said Amory, “he’s a—he’s an intellectual personage not very well known at present.”	Butler, Amory Blaine..." "Who's he?" the little man asked suspiciously.

an intellectual personage	The artist who doesn’t fit—the Rousseau, the Tolstoy, the Samuel Butler, the Amory Blaine—” “Who’s he?” demanded the little man suspiciously. “Well,” said Amory, “he’s a—he’s an intellectual personage not very well known at present.” The little man laughed his conscientious laugh, and stopped rather suddenly as Amory’s burning eyes turned on him.	An intellectual.

stopped rather suddenly as Amory’s burning eyes turned on him.	“Well,” said Amory, “he’s a—he’s an intellectual personage not very well known at present.” The little man laughed his conscientious laugh, and stopped rather suddenly as Amory’s burning eyes turned on him. “What are you laughing at?”	stopped abruptly when Amory glared at him.

his conscientious laugh	“Well,” said Amory, “he’s a—he’s an intellectual personage not very well known at present.” The little man laughed his conscientious laugh, and stopped rather suddenly as Amory’s burning eyes turned on him. “What are you laughing at?”	his sincere laugh

Amory’s burning eyes	“Well,” said Amory, “he’s a—he’s an intellectual personage not very well known at present.” The little man laughed his conscientious laugh, and stopped rather suddenly as Amory’s burning eyes turned on him. “What are you laughing at?”	Amory's intense stare

The little man’s eyes	“These intellectual people—” “Do you know what it means?” The little man’s eyes twitched nervously. “Why, it usually means—” “It always means brainy and well-educated,” interrupted Amory.	The little man's eyes

knowledge of the race’s experience.”	“Why, it usually means—” “It always means brainy and well-educated,” interrupted Amory. “It means having an active knowledge of the race’s experience.” Amory decided to be very rude.	Understanding what people have done and learned throughout history.

the race’s experience	“Why, it usually means—” “It always means brainy and well-educated,” interrupted Amory. “It means having an active knowledge of the race’s experience.” Amory decided to be very rude.	human history

says bellboy, with no implication of youth, “has the usual muddled connotation of all popular words.”	He turned to the big man. “The young man,” he indicated the secretary with his thumb, and said young man as one says bellboy, with no implication of youth, “has the usual muddled connotation of all popular words.” “You object to the fact that capital controls printing?” said the big man, fixing him with his goggles.	like "bellboy," not meaning he's actually young, "has the confusing meanings that all common words have."

the usual muddled connotation	He turned to the big man. “The young man,” he indicated the secretary with his thumb, and said young man as one says bellboy, with no implication of youth, “has the usual muddled connotation of all popular words.” “You object to the fact that capital controls printing?” said the big man, fixing him with his goggles.	the usual confusing meaning

fact that capital controls printing?” said the big man, fixing him with his goggles.	“The young man,” he indicated the secretary with his thumb, and said young man as one says bellboy, with no implication of youth, “has the usual muddled connotation of all popular words.” “You object to the fact that capital controls printing?” said the big man, fixing him with his goggles. “Yes—and I object to doing their mental work for them.	Are you against the idea that money controls the press? said the big man, staring at him through his goggles.

bunch of dubs who submitted to it.”	“Yes—and I object to doing their mental work for them. It seemed to me that the root of all the business I saw around me consisted in overworking and underpaying a bunch of dubs who submitted to it.” “Here now,” said the big man, “you’ll have to admit that the laboring man is certainly highly paid—five and six hour days—it’s ridiculous.	a group of fools who put up with it.

work from a man in the trades-unions.”	“Here now,” said the big man, “you’ll have to admit that the laboring man is certainly highly paid—five and six hour days—it’s ridiculous. You can’t buy an honest day’s work from a man in the trades-unions.” “You’ve brought it on yourselves,” insisted Amory.	work from a union man."

an honest day’s work	“Here now,” said the big man, “you’ll have to admit that the laboring man is certainly highly paid—five and six hour days—it’s ridiculous. You can’t buy an honest day’s work from a man in the trades-unions.” “You’ve brought it on yourselves,” insisted Amory.	A fair day's work.

brought it on yourselves,” insisted Amory.	You can’t buy an honest day’s work from a man in the trades-unions.” “You’ve brought it on yourselves,” insisted Amory. “You people never make concessions until they’re wrung out of you.”	You caused this yourselves," Amory insisted.

class I belonged to until recently; those who by inheritance or industry or brains or dishonesty have become the moneyed class.”	“What people?” “Your class; the class I belonged to until recently; those who by inheritance or industry or brains or dishonesty have become the moneyed class.” “Do you imagine that if that road-mender over there had the money he’d be any more willing to give it up?”	The group I used to be a part of; the people who got rich through inheritance, hard work, intelligence, or even cheating.”

the moneyed class	“What people?” “Your class; the class I belonged to until recently; those who by inheritance or industry or brains or dishonesty have become the moneyed class.” “Do you imagine that if that road-mender over there had the money he’d be any more willing to give it up?”	The rich people.

that road-mender	“Your class; the class I belonged to until recently; those who by inheritance or industry or brains or dishonesty have become the moneyed class.” “Do you imagine that if that road-mender over there had the money he’d be any more willing to give it up?” “No, but what’s that got to do with it?”	that road worker

money he’d be any more willing to give it up?”	“Your class; the class I belonged to until recently; those who by inheritance or industry or brains or dishonesty have become the moneyed class.” “Do you imagine that if that road-mender over there had the money he’d be any more willing to give it up?” “No, but what’s that got to do with it?”	money, would he be any more willing to give it away?

continued Amory, “he’d be worse.	It rather sounds as if it had though.” “In fact,” continued Amory, “he’d be worse. The lower classes are narrower, less pleasant and personally more selfish—certainly more stupid.	Amory went on, "he'd be even worse."

man of fair education,” began Amory slowly, “that is, when he marries he becomes, nine times out of ten, a conservative as far as existing social conditions are concerned.	“When life gets hold of a brainy man of fair education,” began Amory slowly, “that is, when he marries he becomes, nine times out of ten, a conservative as far as existing social conditions are concerned. He may be unselfish, kindhearted, even just in his own way, but his first job is to provide and to hold fast.	a reasonably educated man," Amory began slowly, "that is, when he gets married, he almost always becomes conservative about how society is.

a brainy man	“When life gets hold of a brainy man of fair education,” began Amory slowly, “that is, when he marries he becomes, nine times out of ten, a conservative as far as existing social conditions are concerned. He may be unselfish, kindhearted, even just in his own way, but his first job is to provide and to hold fast.	an intelligent man

be unselfish, kindhearted, even just in his own way, but his first job is to provide and to hold fast.	“When life gets hold of a brainy man of fair education,” began Amory slowly, “that is, when he marries he becomes, nine times out of ten, a conservative as far as existing social conditions are concerned. He may be unselfish, kindhearted, even just in his own way, but his first job is to provide and to hold fast. His wife shoos him on, from ten thousand a year to twenty thousand a year, on and on, in an enclosed treadmill that hasn’t any windows.	He might be unselfish, kind, and even fair in his own way, but his main goal is to provide for his family and keep what he has.

treadmill that hasn’t any windows.	He may be unselfish, kindhearted, even just in his own way, but his first job is to provide and to hold fast. His wife shoos him on, from ten thousand a year to twenty thousand a year, on and on, in an enclosed treadmill that hasn’t any windows. He’s done!	A hamster wheel with no view.

an enclosed treadmill	He may be unselfish, kindhearted, even just in his own way, but his first job is to provide and to hold fast. His wife shoos him on, from ten thousand a year to twenty thousand a year, on and on, in an enclosed treadmill that hasn’t any windows. He’s done!	a never-ending cycle

a spiritually married man	He’s no help! He’s a spiritually married man.” Amory paused and decided that it wasn’t such a bad phrase.	someone who is committed to someone else

book’ that pleased them; maybe they started on the treadmill as I did and were knocked off.	“Some men,” he continued, “escape the grip. Maybe their wives have no social ambitions; maybe they’ve hit a sentence or two in a ‘dangerous book’ that pleased them; maybe they started on the treadmill as I did and were knocked off. Anyway, they’re the congressmen you can’t bribe, the Presidents who aren’t politicians, the writers, speakers, scientists, statesmen who aren’t just popular grab-bags for a half-dozen women and children.”	book' that they liked; maybe they started working mindlessly like I did and then stopped.

no social ambitions	“Some men,” he continued, “escape the grip. Maybe their wives have no social ambitions; maybe they’ve hit a sentence or two in a ‘dangerous book’ that pleased them; maybe they started on the treadmill as I did and were knocked off. Anyway, they’re the congressmen you can’t bribe, the Presidents who aren’t politicians, the writers, speakers, scientists, statesmen who aren’t just popular grab-bags for a half-dozen women and children.”	no desire for social climbing

aren’t just popular grab-bags for a half-dozen women and children.”	Maybe their wives have no social ambitions; maybe they’ve hit a sentence or two in a ‘dangerous book’ that pleased them; maybe they started on the treadmill as I did and were knocked off. Anyway, they’re the congressmen you can’t bribe, the Presidents who aren’t politicians, the writers, speakers, scientists, statesmen who aren’t just popular grab-bags for a half-dozen women and children.” “He’s the natural radical?”	aren't just popular because they provide for a few women and children.

the disillusioned critic	“Yes,” said Amory. “He may vary from the disillusioned critic like old Thornton Hancock, all the way to Trotsky. Now this spiritually unmarried man hasn’t direct power, for unfortunately the spiritually married man, as a byproduct of his money chase, has garnered in the great newspaper, the popular magazine, the influential weekly—so that Mrs. Newspaper, Mrs. Magazine, Mrs. Weekly can have a better limousine than those oil people across the street or those cement people ’round the corner.”	Someone who is disappointed and negative about things.

old Thornton Hancock	“Yes,” said Amory. “He may vary from the disillusioned critic like old Thornton Hancock, all the way to Trotsky. Now this spiritually unmarried man hasn’t direct power, for unfortunately the spiritually married man, as a byproduct of his money chase, has garnered in the great newspaper, the popular magazine, the influential weekly—so that Mrs. Newspaper, Mrs. Magazine, Mrs. Weekly can have a better limousine than those oil people across the street or those cement people ’round the corner.”	old Thornton Hancock

critic like old Thornton Hancock, all the way to Trotsky.	“Yes,” said Amory. “He may vary from the disillusioned critic like old Thornton Hancock, all the way to Trotsky. Now this spiritually unmarried man hasn’t direct power, for unfortunately the spiritually married man, as a byproduct of his money chase, has garnered in the great newspaper, the popular magazine, the influential weekly—so that Mrs. Newspaper, Mrs. Magazine, Mrs. Weekly can have a better limousine than those oil people across the street or those cement people ’round the corner.”	a critic like Thornton Hancock to someone extreme like Trotsky.

magazine, the influential weekly—so that Mrs. Newspaper, Mrs. Magazine, Mrs. Weekly can have a better limousine than those oil people across the street or those cement people ’round the corner.”	“He may vary from the disillusioned critic like old Thornton Hancock, all the way to Trotsky. Now this spiritually unmarried man hasn’t direct power, for unfortunately the spiritually married man, as a byproduct of his money chase, has garnered in the great newspaper, the popular magazine, the influential weekly—so that Mrs. Newspaper, Mrs. Magazine, Mrs. Weekly can have a better limousine than those oil people across the street or those cement people ’round the corner.” “Why not?”	influential magazines and weekly publications, so the owners of the newspapers, magazines, and weeklies can afford better limousines than the oil and cement tycoons.

unfortunately the spiritually married man	“He may vary from the disillusioned critic like old Thornton Hancock, all the way to Trotsky. Now this spiritually unmarried man hasn’t direct power, for unfortunately the spiritually married man, as a byproduct of his money chase, has garnered in the great newspaper, the popular magazine, the influential weekly—so that Mrs. Newspaper, Mrs. Magazine, Mrs. Weekly can have a better limousine than those oil people across the street or those cement people ’round the corner.” “Why not?”	Unfortunately, the man obsessed with material success

a better limousine	“He may vary from the disillusioned critic like old Thornton Hancock, all the way to Trotsky. Now this spiritually unmarried man hasn’t direct power, for unfortunately the spiritually married man, as a byproduct of his money chase, has garnered in the great newspaper, the popular magazine, the influential weekly—so that Mrs. Newspaper, Mrs. Magazine, Mrs. Weekly can have a better limousine than those oil people across the street or those cement people ’round the corner.” “Why not?”	a nicer car

this spiritually unmarried man	“He may vary from the disillusioned critic like old Thornton Hancock, all the way to Trotsky. Now this spiritually unmarried man hasn’t direct power, for unfortunately the spiritually married man, as a byproduct of his money chase, has garnered in the great newspaper, the popular magazine, the influential weekly—so that Mrs. Newspaper, Mrs. Magazine, Mrs. Weekly can have a better limousine than those oil people across the street or those cement people ’round the corner.” “Why not?”	This person who isn't tied down by family or traditional values.

the influential weekly	“He may vary from the disillusioned critic like old Thornton Hancock, all the way to Trotsky. Now this spiritually unmarried man hasn’t direct power, for unfortunately the spiritually married man, as a byproduct of his money chase, has garnered in the great newspaper, the popular magazine, the influential weekly—so that Mrs. Newspaper, Mrs. Magazine, Mrs. Weekly can have a better limousine than those oil people across the street or those cement people ’round the corner.” “Why not?”	the important weekly magazine

his family’s happiness	“Why not?” “It makes wealthy men the keepers of the world’s intellectual conscience and, of course, a man who has money under one set of social institutions quite naturally can’t risk his family’s happiness by letting the clamor for another appear in his newspaper.” “But it appears,” said the big man.	his family's well-being

the world’s intellectual conscience	“Why not?” “It makes wealthy men the keepers of the world’s intellectual conscience and, of course, a man who has money under one set of social institutions quite naturally can’t risk his family’s happiness by letting the clamor for another appear in his newspaper.” “But it appears,” said the big man.	the world's sense of right and wrong about ideas

risk his family’s happiness by letting the clamor for another appear in his newspaper.”	“Why not?” “It makes wealthy men the keepers of the world’s intellectual conscience and, of course, a man who has money under one set of social institutions quite naturally can’t risk his family’s happiness by letting the clamor for another appear in his newspaper.” “But it appears,” said the big man.	risk his family's happiness by allowing calls for change to be published in his newspaper.

wealthy men	“Why not?” “It makes wealthy men the keepers of the world’s intellectual conscience and, of course, a man who has money under one set of social institutions quite naturally can’t risk his family’s happiness by letting the clamor for another appear in his newspaper.” “But it appears,” said the big man.	rich people

the discredited mediums	“But it appears,” said the big man. “Where?—in the discredited mediums. Rotten cheap-papered weeklies.”	unreliable psychics

Rotten cheap-papered weeklies	“Where?—in the discredited mediums. Rotten cheap-papered weeklies.” “All right—go on.”	Terrible, cheap newspapers.

mixture of conditions of which the family is the first, there are these two sorts of brains.	“All right—go on.” “Well, my first point is that through a mixture of conditions of which the family is the first, there are these two sorts of brains. One sort takes human nature as it finds it, uses its timidity, its weakness, and its strength for its own ends.	a combination of factors, starting with family, creates these two types of minds.

takes human nature as it finds it, uses its timidity, its weakness, and its strength for its own ends.	“Well, my first point is that through a mixture of conditions of which the family is the first, there are these two sorts of brains. One sort takes human nature as it finds it, uses its timidity, its weakness, and its strength for its own ends. Opposed is the man who, being spiritually unmarried, continually seeks for new systems that will control or counteract human nature.	accepts people as they are, using their fears, weaknesses, and strengths to their advantage.

man who, being spiritually unmarried, continually seeks for new systems that will control or counteract human nature.	One sort takes human nature as it finds it, uses its timidity, its weakness, and its strength for its own ends. Opposed is the man who, being spiritually unmarried, continually seeks for new systems that will control or counteract human nature. His problem is harder.	a person who is independent and always looking for new ways to manage or change people's behavior.

the spiritually married man	That is his struggle. He is a part of progress—the spiritually married man is not.” The big man produced three big cigars, and proffered them on his huge palm.	a man devoted to his beliefs

part of progress—the spiritually married man is not.”	That is his struggle. He is a part of progress—the spiritually married man is not.” The big man produced three big cigars, and proffered them on his huge palm.	part of progress—a man devoted to spiritual matters is not.”

three big cigars	He is a part of progress—the spiritually married man is not.” The big man produced three big cigars, and proffered them on his huge palm. The little man took one, Amory shook his head and reached for a cigarette.	three big cigars

proffered them on his huge palm.	He is a part of progress—the spiritually married man is not.” The big man produced three big cigars, and proffered them on his huge palm. The little man took one, Amory shook his head and reached for a cigarette.	offered them on his large hand.

economic interdependence	“Modern life,” began Amory again, “changes no longer century by century, but year by year, ten times faster than it ever has before—populations doubling, civilizations unified more closely with other civilizations, economic interdependence, racial questions, and—we’re dawdling along. My idea is that we’ve got to go very much faster.”	economies relying on each other

changes no longer century by century, but year by year, ten times faster than it ever has before—populations doubling, civilizations unified more closely with other civilizations, economic interdependence, racial questions, and—we’re dawdling along.	“Modern life,” began Amory again, “changes no longer century by century, but year by year, ten times faster than it ever has before—populations doubling, civilizations unified more closely with other civilizations, economic interdependence, racial questions, and—we’re dawdling along. My idea is that we’ve got to go very much faster.”	Things aren't changing slowly over centuries anymore, but rapidly every year, ten times faster than ever before—populations are doubling, cultures are merging, economies are linked, race issues are arising, and—we're falling behind.

laughed, too, after a pause.	He slightly emphasized the last words and the chauffeur unconsciously increased the speed of the car. Amory and the big man laughed; the little man laughed, too, after a pause. “Every child,” said Amory, “should have an equal start.	laughed after a moment.

a good physique	“Every child,” said Amory, “should have an equal start. If his father can endow him with a good physique and his mother with some common sense in his early education, that should be his heritage. If the father can’t give him a good physique, if the mother has spent in chasing men the years in which she should have been preparing herself to educate her children, so much the worse for the child.	good health

years in which she should have been preparing herself to educate her children, so much the worse for the child.	If his father can endow him with a good physique and his mother with some common sense in his early education, that should be his heritage. If the father can’t give him a good physique, if the mother has spent in chasing men the years in which she should have been preparing herself to educate her children, so much the worse for the child. He shouldn’t be artificially bolstered up with money, sent to these horrible tutoring schools, dragged through college.	it's bad luck for the child.

a good physique	If his father can endow him with a good physique and his mother with some common sense in his early education, that should be his heritage. If the father can’t give him a good physique, if the mother has spent in chasing men the years in which she should have been preparing herself to educate her children, so much the worse for the child. He shouldn’t be artificially bolstered up with money, sent to these horrible tutoring schools, dragged through college.	good physical health

sent to these horrible tutoring schools, dragged through college.	If the father can’t give him a good physique, if the mother has spent in chasing men the years in which she should have been preparing herself to educate her children, so much the worse for the child. He shouldn’t be artificially bolstered up with money, sent to these horrible tutoring schools, dragged through college. Every boy ought to have an equal start.”	sent to bad tutoring schools, forced to go to college.

these horrible tutoring schools	If the father can’t give him a good physique, if the mother has spent in chasing men the years in which she should have been preparing herself to educate her children, so much the worse for the child. He shouldn’t be artificially bolstered up with money, sent to these horrible tutoring schools, dragged through college. Every boy ought to have an equal start.”	bad private schools

goggles indicating neither approval nor objection.	Every boy ought to have an equal start.” “All right,” said the big man, his goggles indicating neither approval nor objection. “Next I’d have a fair trial of government ownership of all industries.”	goggles showing no sign of agreement or disagreement.

the best analytical business minds	“No—it merely failed. If we had government ownership we’d have the best analytical business minds in the government working for something besides themselves. We’d have Mackays instead of Burlesons; we’d have Morgans in the Treasury Department; we’d have Hills running interstate commerce.	the smartest business experts

minds in the government working for something besides themselves.	“No—it merely failed. If we had government ownership we’d have the best analytical business minds in the government working for something besides themselves. We’d have Mackays instead of Burlesons; we’d have Morgans in the Treasury Department; we’d have Hills running interstate commerce.	smart people in government working for the good of the country, not just for their own benefit.

Morgans in the Treasury Department; we’d have Hills running interstate commerce.	If we had government ownership we’d have the best analytical business minds in the government working for something besides themselves. We’d have Mackays instead of Burlesons; we’d have Morgans in the Treasury Department; we’d have Hills running interstate commerce. We’d have the best lawyers in the Senate.”	We'd have experts like Morgan in charge of finances and Hills managing trade between states.

said Amory, shaking his head.	“They wouldn’t give their best efforts for nothing. McAdoo—” “No,” said Amory, shaking his head. “Money isn’t the only stimulus that brings out the best that’s in a man, even in America.”	Amory shook his head.

’s in a man, even in America.”	McAdoo—” “No,” said Amory, shaking his head. “Money isn’t the only stimulus that brings out the best that’s in a man, even in America.” “You said a while ago that it was.”	that brings out the best in a man, even in America.

the only stimulus	McAdoo—” “No,” said Amory, shaking his head. “Money isn’t the only stimulus that brings out the best that’s in a man, even in America.” “You said a while ago that it was.”	the only thing that motivates people

But if it were made illegal to have more than a certain amount the best men would all flock for the one other reward which attracts humanity—honor.”	“It is, right now. But if it were made illegal to have more than a certain amount the best men would all flock for the one other reward which attracts humanity—honor.” The big man made a sound that was very like boo.	But if owning more than a certain amount was outlawed, the most capable people would seek the only other thing that motivates people: honor.

sound that was very like boo.	But if it were made illegal to have more than a certain amount the best men would all flock for the one other reward which attracts humanity—honor.” The big man made a sound that was very like boo. “That’s the silliest thing you’ve said yet.”	sounded like a boo.

thing you’ve said yet.”	The big man made a sound that was very like boo. “That’s the silliest thing you’ve said yet.” “No, it isn’t silly.	thing you've said yet.

a hundred petty honors	It’s quite plausible. If you’d gone to college you’d have been struck by the fact that the men there would work twice as hard for any one of a hundred petty honors as those other men did who were earning their way through.” “Kids—child’s play!” scoffed his antagonist.	lots of small, unimportant awards

did who were earning their way through.”	It’s quite plausible. If you’d gone to college you’d have been struck by the fact that the men there would work twice as hard for any one of a hundred petty honors as those other men did who were earning their way through.” “Kids—child’s play!” scoffed his antagonist.	compared to those who were working to pay their way through school.

child’s play	If you’d gone to college you’d have been struck by the fact that the men there would work twice as hard for any one of a hundred petty honors as those other men did who were earning their way through.” “Kids—child’s play!” scoffed his antagonist. “Not by a darned sight—unless we’re all children.	easy

Kids—child’s play!” scoffed his antagonist.	If you’d gone to college you’d have been struck by the fact that the men there would work twice as hard for any one of a hundred petty honors as those other men did who were earning their way through.” “Kids—child’s play!” scoffed his antagonist. “Not by a darned sight—unless we’re all children.	Kids? That's just child's play! scoffed his opponent.

a darned sight	“Kids—child’s play!” scoffed his antagonist. “Not by a darned sight—unless we’re all children. Did you ever see a grown man when he’s trying for a secret society—or a rising family whose name is up at some club?	A lot.

’re all children.	“Kids—child’s play!” scoffed his antagonist. “Not by a darned sight—unless we’re all children. Did you ever see a grown man when he’s trying for a secret society—or a rising family whose name is up at some club?	We're all children.

jump when they hear the sound of the word.	Did you ever see a grown man when he’s trying for a secret society—or a rising family whose name is up at some club? They’ll jump when they hear the sound of the word. The idea that to make a man work you’ve got to hold gold in front of his eyes is a growth, not an axiom.	react instantly and eagerly when they hear the name.

growth, not an axiom.	They’ll jump when they hear the sound of the word. The idea that to make a man work you’ve got to hold gold in front of his eyes is a growth, not an axiom. We’ve done that for so long that we’ve forgotten there’s any other way.	something that developed over time, not a self-evident truth.

done that for so long that we’ve forgotten there’s any other way.	The idea that to make a man work you’ve got to hold gold in front of his eyes is a growth, not an axiom. We’ve done that for so long that we’ve forgotten there’s any other way. We’ve made a world where that’s necessary.	We've done it for so long we've forgotten there are alternatives.

world where that’s necessary.	We’ve done that for so long that we’ve forgotten there’s any other way. We’ve made a world where that’s necessary. Let me tell you”—Amory became emphatic—“if there were ten men insured against either wealth or starvation, and offered a green ribbon for five hours’ work a day and a blue ribbon for ten hours’ work a day, nine out of ten of them would be trying for the blue ribbon.	a world where that's required.

nine out of ten of them would be trying for the blue ribbon.	We’ve made a world where that’s necessary. Let me tell you”—Amory became emphatic—“if there were ten men insured against either wealth or starvation, and offered a green ribbon for five hours’ work a day and a blue ribbon for ten hours’ work a day, nine out of ten of them would be trying for the blue ribbon. That competitive instinct only wants a badge.	nine out of ten would work harder for the better reward.

That competitive instinct	Let me tell you”—Amory became emphatic—“if there were ten men insured against either wealth or starvation, and offered a green ribbon for five hours’ work a day and a blue ribbon for ten hours’ work a day, nine out of ten of them would be trying for the blue ribbon. That competitive instinct only wants a badge. If the size of their house is the badge they’ll sweat their heads off for that.	That desire to compete.

badge they’ll sweat their heads off for that.	That competitive instinct only wants a badge. If the size of their house is the badge they’ll sweat their heads off for that. If it’s only a blue ribbon, I damn near believe they’ll work just as hard.	they'll work extremely hard to get it.

’s only a blue ribbon, I damn near believe they’ll work just as hard.	If the size of their house is the badge they’ll sweat their heads off for that. If it’s only a blue ribbon, I damn near believe they’ll work just as hard. They have in other ages.”	If it's just a prize, I almost believe they'll work just as hard.

A fierce hiss	I think these people are going to come and take what they want pretty soon.” A fierce hiss came from the little man. “Machine-guns!”	A fierce hiss

statistics of property owners and non-property owners; he decided to change the subject.	“In this country there are enough property owners not to permit that sort of thing.” Amory wished he knew the statistics of property owners and non-property owners; he decided to change the subject. But the big man was aroused.	numbers of people who own property versus those who don't; he decided to change the subject.

’re on dangerous ground.”	But the big man was aroused. “When you talk of ‘taking things away,’ you’re on dangerous ground.” “How can they get it without taking it?	you're in a dangerous situation.

stalled off with promises.	“How can they get it without taking it? For years people have been stalled off with promises. Socialism may not be progress, but the threat of the red flag is certainly the inspiring force of all reform.	delayed with promises.

the inspiring force	For years people have been stalled off with promises. Socialism may not be progress, but the threat of the red flag is certainly the inspiring force of all reform. You’ve got to be sensational to get attention.”	what motivates change

example of a beneficent violence, I suppose?”	You’ve got to be sensational to get attention.” “Russia is your example of a beneficent violence, I suppose?” “Quite possibly,” admitted Amory.	So, you think Russia is an example of violence that's actually helpful?

a beneficent violence	You’ve got to be sensational to get attention.” “Russia is your example of a beneficent violence, I suppose?” “Quite possibly,” admitted Amory.	violence that does good

overflowing just as the French Revolution did, but I’ve no doubt that it’s really a great experiment and well worth while.”	“Quite possibly,” admitted Amory. “Of course, it’s overflowing just as the French Revolution did, but I’ve no doubt that it’s really a great experiment and well worth while.” “Don’t you believe in moderation?”	It's probably going too far, like the French Revolution did, but I still think it's a valuable and important test.

believe in moderation?”	“Of course, it’s overflowing just as the French Revolution did, but I’ve no doubt that it’s really a great experiment and well worth while.” “Don’t you believe in moderation?” “You won’t listen to the moderates, and it’s almost too late.	Don't you believe in moderation?

listen to the moderates, and it’s almost too late.	“Don’t you believe in moderation?” “You won’t listen to the moderates, and it’s almost too late. The truth is that the public has done one of those startling and amazing things that they do about once in a hundred years.	listen to reasonable people, and time is running out.

those startling and amazing things	“You won’t listen to the moderates, and it’s almost too late. The truth is that the public has done one of those startling and amazing things that they do about once in a hundred years. They’ve seized an idea.”	surprising and incredible things

one of those startling and amazing things that they do about once in a hundred years.	“You won’t listen to the moderates, and it’s almost too late. The truth is that the public has done one of those startling and amazing things that they do about once in a hundred years. They’ve seized an idea.”	one of those rare, surprising things they do.

man with much profundity, “and divided it up in equ—” “Oh, shut up!”	“If you took all the money in the world,” said the little man with much profundity, “and divided it up in equ—” “Oh, shut up!” said Amory briskly and, paying no attention to the little man’s enraged stare, he went on with his argument.	man very seriously, “and divided it up equally—” “Oh, shut up!”

much profundity	“If you took all the money in the world,” said the little man with much profundity, “and divided it up in equ—” “Oh, shut up!” said Amory briskly and, paying no attention to the little man’s enraged stare, he went on with his argument.	deeply

went on with his argument.	“If you took all the money in the world,” said the little man with much profundity, “and divided it up in equ—” “Oh, shut up!” said Amory briskly and, paying no attention to the little man’s enraged stare, he went on with his argument. “The human stomach—” he began; but the big man interrupted rather impatiently.	continued his point.

the little man’s enraged stare	“If you took all the money in the world,” said the little man with much profundity, “and divided it up in equ—” “Oh, shut up!” said Amory briskly and, paying no attention to the little man’s enraged stare, he went on with his argument. “The human stomach—” he began; but the big man interrupted rather impatiently.	the little man's angry look

agree with one-half you’ve said.	I’ve been feeling mine all day. Anyway, I don’t agree with one-half you’ve said. Government ownership is the basis of your whole argument, and it’s invariably a beehive of corruption.	agree with half of what you said.

beehive of corruption.	Anyway, I don’t agree with one-half you’ve said. Government ownership is the basis of your whole argument, and it’s invariably a beehive of corruption. Men won’t work for blue ribbons, that’s all rot.”	full of corruption.

work for blue ribbons, that’s all rot.”	Government ownership is the basis of your whole argument, and it’s invariably a beehive of corruption. Men won’t work for blue ribbons, that’s all rot.” When he ceased the little man spoke up with a determined nod, as if resolved this time to have his say out.	work for recognition or awards, that's nonsense.

a determined nod	Men won’t work for blue ribbons, that’s all rot.” When he ceased the little man spoke up with a determined nod, as if resolved this time to have his say out. “There are certain things which are human nature,” he asserted with an owl-like look, “which always have been and always will be, which can’t be changed.”	a firm nod

resolved this time to have his say out.	Men won’t work for blue ribbons, that’s all rot.” When he ceased the little man spoke up with a determined nod, as if resolved this time to have his say out. “There are certain things which are human nature,” he asserted with an owl-like look, “which always have been and always will be, which can’t be changed.”	determined to say what he thought this time.

an owl-like look	When he ceased the little man spoke up with a determined nod, as if resolved this time to have his say out. “There are certain things which are human nature,” he asserted with an owl-like look, “which always have been and always will be, which can’t be changed.” Amory looked from the small man to the big man helplessly.	a wise and serious expression

things which are human nature,” he asserted with an owl-like look, “which always have been and always will be, which can’t be changed.”	When he ceased the little man spoke up with a determined nod, as if resolved this time to have his say out. “There are certain things which are human nature,” he asserted with an owl-like look, “which always have been and always will be, which can’t be changed.” Amory looked from the small man to the big man helplessly.	Things that are part of human nature," he said with a wise look, "have always been and will always be, and can't be changed.

looked from the small man to the big man helplessly.	“There are certain things which are human nature,” he asserted with an owl-like look, “which always have been and always will be, which can’t be changed.” Amory looked from the small man to the big man helplessly. “Listen to that!	looked from the short man to the tall man, feeling lost.

discouraged with progress.	“Listen to that! That’s what makes me discouraged with progress. Listen to that!	Disappointed with progress.

over one hundred natural phenomena	Listen to that! I can name offhand over one hundred natural phenomena that have been changed by the will of man—a hundred instincts in man that have been wiped out or are now held in check by civilization. What this man here just said has been for thousands of years the last refuge of the associated muttonheads of the world.	more than a hundred natural things

a hundred instincts	Listen to that! I can name offhand over one hundred natural phenomena that have been changed by the will of man—a hundred instincts in man that have been wiped out or are now held in check by civilization. What this man here just said has been for thousands of years the last refuge of the associated muttonheads of the world.	a hundred natural behaviors

will of man—a hundred instincts in man that have been wiped out or are now held in check by civilization.	Listen to that! I can name offhand over one hundred natural phenomena that have been changed by the will of man—a hundred instincts in man that have been wiped out or are now held in check by civilization. What this man here just said has been for thousands of years the last refuge of the associated muttonheads of the world.	human choices and actions—and how civilization has eliminated or controlled hundreds of human instincts.

the associated muttonheads	I can name offhand over one hundred natural phenomena that have been changed by the will of man—a hundred instincts in man that have been wiped out or are now held in check by civilization. What this man here just said has been for thousands of years the last refuge of the associated muttonheads of the world. It negates the efforts of every scientist, statesman, moralist, reformer, doctor, and philosopher that ever gave his life to humanity’s service.	the world's fools

the last refuge	I can name offhand over one hundred natural phenomena that have been changed by the will of man—a hundred instincts in man that have been wiped out or are now held in check by civilization. What this man here just said has been for thousands of years the last refuge of the associated muttonheads of the world. It negates the efforts of every scientist, statesman, moralist, reformer, doctor, and philosopher that ever gave his life to humanity’s service.	the final excuse

refuge of the associated muttonheads of the world.	I can name offhand over one hundred natural phenomena that have been changed by the will of man—a hundred instincts in man that have been wiped out or are now held in check by civilization. What this man here just said has been for thousands of years the last refuge of the associated muttonheads of the world. It negates the efforts of every scientist, statesman, moralist, reformer, doctor, and philosopher that ever gave his life to humanity’s service.	last resort of all the world's fools.

scientist, statesman, moralist, reformer, doctor, and philosopher that ever gave his life to humanity’s service.	What this man here just said has been for thousands of years the last refuge of the associated muttonheads of the world. It negates the efforts of every scientist, statesman, moralist, reformer, doctor, and philosopher that ever gave his life to humanity’s service. It’s a flat impeachment of all that’s worth while in human nature.	scientists, leaders, moral guides, reformers, doctors, and philosophers who dedicated their lives to helping humanity.

humanity’s service	What this man here just said has been for thousands of years the last refuge of the associated muttonheads of the world. It negates the efforts of every scientist, statesman, moralist, reformer, doctor, and philosopher that ever gave his life to humanity’s service. It’s a flat impeachment of all that’s worth while in human nature.	serving humanity

a flat impeachment	It negates the efforts of every scientist, statesman, moralist, reformer, doctor, and philosopher that ever gave his life to humanity’s service. It’s a flat impeachment of all that’s worth while in human nature. Every person over twenty-five years old who makes that statement in cold blood ought to be deprived of the franchise.”	a direct accusation

impeachment of all that’s worth while in human nature.	It negates the efforts of every scientist, statesman, moralist, reformer, doctor, and philosopher that ever gave his life to humanity’s service. It’s a flat impeachment of all that’s worth while in human nature. Every person over twenty-five years old who makes that statement in cold blood ought to be deprived of the franchise.”	a condemnation of everything good in human nature.

deprived of the franchise.”	It’s a flat impeachment of all that’s worth while in human nature. Every person over twenty-five years old who makes that statement in cold blood ought to be deprived of the franchise.” The little man leaned back against the seat, his face purple with rage.	lose the right to vote."

remarks to the big man.	The little man leaned back against the seat, his face purple with rage. Amory continued, addressing his remarks to the big man. “These quarter-educated, stale-minded men such as your friend here, who think they think, every question that comes up, you’ll find his type in the usual ghastly muddle.	speaking to the big man.

These quarter-educated, stale-minded men	Amory continued, addressing his remarks to the big man. “These quarter-educated, stale-minded men such as your friend here, who think they think, every question that comes up, you’ll find his type in the usual ghastly muddle. One minute it’s ‘the brutality and inhumanity of these Prussians’—the	These poorly educated, narrow-minded men

find his type in the usual ghastly muddle.	Amory continued, addressing his remarks to the big man. “These quarter-educated, stale-minded men such as your friend here, who think they think, every question that comes up, you’ll find his type in the usual ghastly muddle. One minute it’s ‘the brutality and inhumanity of these Prussians’—the	you'll find his type completely mixed up.

the usual ghastly muddle	Amory continued, addressing his remarks to the big man. “These quarter-educated, stale-minded men such as your friend here, who think they think, every question that comes up, you’ll find his type in the usual ghastly muddle. One minute it’s ‘the brutality and inhumanity of these Prussians’—the	the typical awful mess

brutality and inhumanity of these Prussians’—the	“These quarter-educated, stale-minded men such as your friend here, who think they think, every question that comes up, you’ll find his type in the usual ghastly muddle. One minute it’s ‘the brutality and inhumanity of these Prussians’—the next	the brutality and inhumanity of these Prussians.

these Prussians’—the	“These quarter-educated, stale-minded men such as your friend here, who think they think, every question that comes up, you’ll find his type in the usual ghastly muddle. One minute it’s ‘the brutality and inhumanity of these Prussians’—the next	these Prussians'—the

faith in these idealists.’	it’s ‘we ought to exterminate the whole German people.’ They always believe that ‘things are in a bad way now,’ but they ‘haven’t any faith in these idealists.’ One minute they call Wilson ‘just a dreamer, not practical’—a year later they rail at him for making his dreams realities.	believe in these dreamers.

dreamer, not practical’—a year later they rail at him for making his dreams realities.	They always believe that ‘things are in a bad way now,’ but they ‘haven’t any faith in these idealists.’ One minute they call Wilson ‘just a dreamer, not practical’—a year later they rail at him for making his dreams realities. They haven’t clear logical ideas on one single subject except a sturdy, stolid opposition to all change.	a dreamer, not practical," but then a year later they criticize him for actually making his dreams come true.

clear logical ideas on one single subject except a sturdy, stolid opposition to all change.	One minute they call Wilson ‘just a dreamer, not practical’—a year later they rail at him for making his dreams realities. They haven’t clear logical ideas on one single subject except a sturdy, stolid opposition to all change. They don’t think uneducated people should be highly paid, but they won’t see that if they don’t pay the uneducated people their children are going to be uneducated too, and we’re going round and round in a circle.	clear, logical ideas about anything except stubbornly resisting all change.

a sturdy, stolid opposition	One minute they call Wilson ‘just a dreamer, not practical’—a year later they rail at him for making his dreams realities. They haven’t clear logical ideas on one single subject except a sturdy, stolid opposition to all change. They don’t think uneducated people should be highly paid, but they won’t see that if they don’t pay the uneducated people their children are going to be uneducated too, and we’re going round and round in a circle.	strong, unwavering resistance

the uneducated people	They haven’t clear logical ideas on one single subject except a sturdy, stolid opposition to all change. They don’t think uneducated people should be highly paid, but they won’t see that if they don’t pay the uneducated people their children are going to be uneducated too, and we’re going round and round in a circle. That—is the great middle class!”	unskilled workers

uneducated people	They haven’t clear logical ideas on one single subject except a sturdy, stolid opposition to all change. They don’t think uneducated people should be highly paid, but they won’t see that if they don’t pay the uneducated people their children are going to be uneducated too, and we’re going round and round in a circle. That—is the great middle class!”	people without much education

a broad grin	That—is the great middle class!” The big man with a broad grin on his face leaned over and smiled at the little man. “You’re catching it pretty heavy, Garvin; how do you feel?”	big smile

grin on his face leaned over and smiled at the little man.	That—is the great middle class!” The big man with a broad grin on his face leaned over and smiled at the little man. “You’re catching it pretty heavy, Garvin; how do you feel?”	smiled at the little man.

ridiculous as to be beneath notice.	“You’re catching it pretty heavy, Garvin; how do you feel?” The little man made an attempt to smile and act as if the whole matter were so ridiculous as to be beneath notice. But Amory was not through.	too ridiculous to even care about.

theory that people are fit to govern themselves rests on this man.	But Amory was not through. “The theory that people are fit to govern themselves rests on this man. If he can be educated to think clearly, concisely, and logically, freed of his habit of taking refuge in platitudes and prejudices and sentimentalisms, then I’m a militant Socialist.	the idea that people can rule themselves depends on this man.

freed of his habit of taking refuge in platitudes and prejudices and sentimentalisms, then I’m a militant Socialist.	“The theory that people are fit to govern themselves rests on this man. If he can be educated to think clearly, concisely, and logically, freed of his habit of taking refuge in platitudes and prejudices and sentimentalisms, then I’m a militant Socialist. If he can’t, then I don’t think it matters much what happens to man or his systems, now or hereafter.”	If he can break free from relying on clichés, biases, and excessive emotion, then I'm a strong supporter of Socialism.

a militant Socialist	“The theory that people are fit to govern themselves rests on this man. If he can be educated to think clearly, concisely, and logically, freed of his habit of taking refuge in platitudes and prejudices and sentimentalisms, then I’m a militant Socialist. If he can’t, then I don’t think it matters much what happens to man or his systems, now or hereafter.”	a strong supporter of socialism

happens to man or his systems, now or hereafter.”	If he can be educated to think clearly, concisely, and logically, freed of his habit of taking refuge in platitudes and prejudices and sentimentalisms, then I’m a militant Socialist. If he can’t, then I don’t think it matters much what happens to man or his systems, now or hereafter.” “I am both interested and amused,” said the big man.	what happens to humanity or its structures, now or in the future.

for in spite of going to college I’ve managed to pick up a good education.”	“Which may only mean that I have neither been corrupted nor made timid by contemporary experience. I possess the most valuable experience, the experience of the race, for in spite of going to college I’ve managed to pick up a good education.” “You talk glibly.”	even though I went to college, I still managed to get a good education.

time in my life I’ve argued Socialism.	“It’s not all rubbish,” cried Amory passionately. “This is the first time in my life I’ve argued Socialism. It’s the only panacea I know.	time I've debated Socialism.

the only panacea	“This is the first time in my life I’ve argued Socialism. It’s the only panacea I know. I’m restless.	the only cure-all

panacea I know.	“This is the first time in my life I’ve argued Socialism. It’s the only panacea I know. I’m restless.	The only cure-all I know.

sell his talents to a button manufacturer.	My whole generation is restless. I’m sick of a system where the richest man gets the most beautiful girl if he wants her, where the artist without an income has to sell his talents to a button manufacturer. Even if I had no talents I’d not be content to work ten years, condemned either to celibacy or a furtive indulgence, to give some man’s son an automobile.”	sell his skills to a boring company.

some man’s son	I’m sick of a system where the richest man gets the most beautiful girl if he wants her, where the artist without an income has to sell his talents to a button manufacturer. Even if I had no talents I’d not be content to work ten years, condemned either to celibacy or a furtive indulgence, to give some man’s son an automobile.” “But, if you’re not sure—” “That doesn’t matter,” exclaimed Amory.	another man's son

a furtive indulgence	I’m sick of a system where the richest man gets the most beautiful girl if he wants her, where the artist without an income has to sell his talents to a button manufacturer. Even if I had no talents I’d not be content to work ten years, condemned either to celibacy or a furtive indulgence, to give some man’s son an automobile.” “But, if you’re not sure—” “That doesn’t matter,” exclaimed Amory.	a secret fling

had no talents I’d not be content to work ten years, condemned either to celibacy or a furtive indulgence, to give some man’s son an automobile.”	I’m sick of a system where the richest man gets the most beautiful girl if he wants her, where the artist without an income has to sell his talents to a button manufacturer. Even if I had no talents I’d not be content to work ten years, condemned either to celibacy or a furtive indulgence, to give some man’s son an automobile.” “But, if you’re not sure—” “That doesn’t matter,” exclaimed Amory.	didn't have any skills, I wouldn't be happy working for ten years, forced to be celibate or have secret affairs, just to buy some rich guy's son a car.

matter,” exclaimed Amory.	Even if I had no talents I’d not be content to work ten years, condemned either to celibacy or a furtive indulgence, to give some man’s son an automobile.” “But, if you’re not sure—” “That doesn’t matter,” exclaimed Amory. “My position couldn’t be worse.	matter," Amory exclaimed.

too many outworn systems	Of course I’m selfish. It seems to me I’ve been a fish out of water in too many outworn systems. I was probably one of the two dozen men in my class at college who got a decent education; still they’d let any well-tutored flathead play football	too many outdated systems

out of water in too many outworn systems.	Of course I’m selfish. It seems to me I’ve been a fish out of water in too many outworn systems. I was probably one of the two dozen men in my class at college who got a decent education; still they’d let any well-tutored flathead play football	Feeling like I don't belong in too many outdated situations.

men in my class at college who got a decent education; still they’d let any well-tutored flathead play football	It seems to me I’ve been a fish out of water in too many outworn systems. I was probably one of the two dozen men in my class at college who got a decent education; still they’d let any well-tutored flathead play football and I was ineligible, because some silly old men thought we should all profit by conic sections.	men in my class at college who actually learned something; but they'd let any dumb jock play football

any well-tutored flathead	It seems to me I’ve been a fish out of water in too many outworn systems. I was probably one of the two dozen men in my class at college who got a decent education; still they’d let any well-tutored flathead play football and I was ineligible, because some silly old men thought we should all profit by conic sections.	any well-coached idiot

conic sections	I was probably one of the two dozen men in my class at college who got a decent education; still they’d let any well-tutored flathead play football and I was ineligible, because some silly old men thought we should all profit by conic sections. I loathed the army.	geometry

thought we should all profit by conic sections.	I was probably one of the two dozen men in my class at college who got a decent education; still they’d let any well-tutored flathead play football and I was ineligible, because some silly old men thought we should all profit by conic sections. I loathed the army.	thought we should all benefit from studying math.

love with change and I’ve killed my conscience—” “So you’ll go along crying that we must go faster.”	I loathed business. I’m in love with change and I’ve killed my conscience—” “So you’ll go along crying that we must go faster.” “That, at least, is true,” Amory insisted.	love change and don't care about right or wrong anymore, so you'll always be pushing to move faster.

A laissez-faire policy	“Reform won’t catch up to the needs of civilization unless it’s made to. A laissez-faire policy is like spoiling a child by saying he’ll turn out all right in the end. He will—if he’s made to.”	A hands-off approach

is like spoiling a child by saying he’ll turn out all right in the end.	“Reform won’t catch up to the needs of civilization unless it’s made to. A laissez-faire policy is like spoiling a child by saying he’ll turn out all right in the end. He will—if he’s made to.”	is like spoiling a child by assuming they'll be fine later.

all this Socialist patter	He will—if he’s made to.” “But you don’t believe all this Socialist patter you talk.” “I don’t know.	all this Socialist talk

patter you talk.”	He will—if he’s made to.” “But you don’t believe all this Socialist patter you talk.” “I don’t know.	the stuff you're saying."

half of what I said.”	Until I talked to you I hadn’t thought seriously about it. I wasn’t sure of half of what I said.” “You puzzle me,” said the big man, “but you’re all alike.	Half of what I said.

is the most exacting of all dramatists about his royalties.	“You puzzle me,” said the big man, “but you’re all alike. They say Bernard Shaw, in spite of his doctrines, is the most exacting of all dramatists about his royalties. To the last farthing.”	is the most demanding of all playwrights when it comes to getting paid.

the last farthing	They say Bernard Shaw, in spite of his doctrines, is the most exacting of all dramatists about his royalties. To the last farthing.” “Well,” said Amory, “I simply state that I’m a product of a versatile mind in a restless generation—with every reason to throw my mind and pen in with the radicals.	every last penny

product of a versatile mind in a restless generation—with every reason to throw my mind and pen in with the radicals.	To the last farthing.” “Well,” said Amory, “I simply state that I’m a product of a versatile mind in a restless generation—with every reason to throw my mind and pen in with the radicals. Even if, deep in my heart, I thought we were all blind atoms in a world as limited as a stroke of a pendulum, I and my sort would struggle against tradition; try, at least, to displace old cants with new ones.	a result of a flexible mind in a troubled generation—with every reason to support radical ideas and causes.

a restless generation	To the last farthing.” “Well,” said Amory, “I simply state that I’m a product of a versatile mind in a restless generation—with every reason to throw my mind and pen in with the radicals. Even if, deep in my heart, I thought we were all blind atoms in a world as limited as a stroke of a pendulum, I and my sort would struggle against tradition; try, at least, to displace old cants with new ones.	a generation that doesn't settle down

a versatile mind	To the last farthing.” “Well,” said Amory, “I simply state that I’m a product of a versatile mind in a restless generation—with every reason to throw my mind and pen in with the radicals. Even if, deep in my heart, I thought we were all blind atoms in a world as limited as a stroke of a pendulum, I and my sort would struggle against tradition; try, at least, to displace old cants with new ones.	a flexible thinker

stroke of a pendulum, I and my sort would struggle against tradition; try, at least, to displace old cants with new ones.	“Well,” said Amory, “I simply state that I’m a product of a versatile mind in a restless generation—with every reason to throw my mind and pen in with the radicals. Even if, deep in my heart, I thought we were all blind atoms in a world as limited as a stroke of a pendulum, I and my sort would struggle against tradition; try, at least, to displace old cants with new ones. I’ve thought I was right about life at various times, but faith is difficult.	swing of a pendulum, people like me would fight against tradition; try, at least, to replace old, tired ideas with new ones.

seeking for the grail it may be a damned amusing game.”	One thing I know. If living isn’t a seeking for the grail it may be a damned amusing game.” For a minute neither spoke and then the big man asked: “What was your university?”	searching for something meaningful, it can still be a pretty fun game.

a damned amusing game	One thing I know. If living isn’t a seeking for the grail it may be a damned amusing game.” For a minute neither spoke and then the big man asked: “What was your university?”	A really fun game.

expression of his goggles altered slightly.	“Princeton.” The big man became suddenly interested; the expression of his goggles altered slightly. “I sent my son to Princeton.”	His face changed a little.

been all along a sense of familiarity.	We were very close.” Amory began to perceive a resemblance between the father and the dead son and he told himself that there had been all along a sense of familiarity. Jesse Ferrenby, the man who in college had borne off the crown that he had aspired to.	There had always been a feeling of familiarity.

man who in college had borne off the crown that he had aspired to.	Amory began to perceive a resemblance between the father and the dead son and he told himself that there had been all along a sense of familiarity. Jesse Ferrenby, the man who in college had borne off the crown that he had aspired to. It was all so far away.	the man who had been more successful than him in college.

slowed up at the entrance to a great estate, ringed around by a huge hedge and a tall iron fence.	It was all so far away. What little boys they had been, working for blue ribbons— The car slowed up at the entrance to a great estate, ringed around by a huge hedge and a tall iron fence. “Won’t you come in for lunch?”	slowed down at the entrance to a large property, surrounded by a big hedge and a tall iron fence.

a huge hedge	It was all so far away. What little boys they had been, working for blue ribbons— The car slowed up at the entrance to a great estate, ringed around by a huge hedge and a tall iron fence. “Won’t you come in for lunch?”	a really big hedge

more than outweighed any disfavor he had created by his opinions.	The big man held out his hand. Amory saw that the fact that he had known Jesse more than outweighed any disfavor he had created by his opinions. What ghosts were people with which to work!	mattered more than any trouble his opinions caused.

insisted on shaking hands.	What ghosts were people with which to work! Even the little man insisted on shaking hands. “Goodbye!” shouted Mr. Ferrenby, as the car turned the corner and started up the drive.	demanded to shake hands.

shouted Mr. Ferrenby, as the car turned the corner and started up the drive.	Even the little man insisted on shaking hands. “Goodbye!” shouted Mr. Ferrenby, as the car turned the corner and started up the drive. “Good luck to you and bad luck to your theories.”	Mr. Ferrenby shouted as the car turned the corner and went up the driveway.

cried Amory, smiling and waving his hand.	“Good luck to you and bad luck to your theories.” “Same to you, sir,” cried Amory, smiling and waving his hand.	Amory called out, smiling and waving.

the Jersey roadside	Eight hours from Princeton Amory sat down by the Jersey roadside and looked at the frostbitten country. Nature as a rather coarse phenomenon composed largely of flowers that, when closely inspected, appeared moth-eaten, and of ants that endlessly traversed blades of grass, was always disillusioning; nature represented by skies and waters and far horizons was more likable.	the side of the road in New Jersey

looked at the frostbitten country.	Eight hours from Princeton Amory sat down by the Jersey roadside and looked at the frostbitten country. Nature as a rather coarse phenomenon composed largely of flowers that, when closely inspected, appeared moth-eaten, and of ants that endlessly traversed blades of grass, was always disillusioning; nature represented by skies and waters and far horizons was more likable.	looked at the frozen countryside.

the frostbitten country	Eight hours from Princeton Amory sat down by the Jersey roadside and looked at the frostbitten country. Nature as a rather coarse phenomenon composed largely of flowers that, when closely inspected, appeared moth-eaten, and of ants that endlessly traversed blades of grass, was always disillusioning; nature represented by skies and waters and far horizons was more likable.	the frozen countryside

Nature as a rather coarse phenomenon composed largely of flowers that, when closely inspected, appeared moth-eaten, and of ants that endlessly traversed blades of grass, was always disillusioning; nature represented by skies and waters and far horizons was more likable.	Eight hours from Princeton Amory sat down by the Jersey roadside and looked at the frostbitten country. Nature as a rather coarse phenomenon composed largely of flowers that, when closely inspected, appeared moth-eaten, and of ants that endlessly traversed blades of grass, was always disillusioning; nature represented by skies and waters and far horizons was more likable. Frost and the promise of winter thrilled him now, made him think of a wild battle between St. Regis and Groton, ages ago, seven years ago—and of an autumn day in France twelve months before when he had lain in tall grass, his platoon flattened down close around him, waiting to tap the shoulders of a Lewis gunner.	Nature, when seen up close in its rougher aspects like imperfect flowers and busy ants, was disappointing. But nature as vast skies, waters, and distant horizons was more appealing.

endlessly traversed blades	Eight hours from Princeton Amory sat down by the Jersey roadside and looked at the frostbitten country. Nature as a rather coarse phenomenon composed largely of flowers that, when closely inspected, appeared moth-eaten, and of ants that endlessly traversed blades of grass, was always disillusioning; nature represented by skies and waters and far horizons was more likable. Frost and the promise of winter thrilled him now, made him think of a wild battle between St. Regis and Groton, ages ago, seven years ago—and of an autumn day in France twelve months before when he had lain in tall grass, his platoon flattened down close around him, waiting to tap the shoulders of a Lewis gunner.	constantly moved across blades

a rather coarse phenomenon	Eight hours from Princeton Amory sat down by the Jersey roadside and looked at the frostbitten country. Nature as a rather coarse phenomenon composed largely of flowers that, when closely inspected, appeared moth-eaten, and of ants that endlessly traversed blades of grass, was always disillusioning; nature represented by skies and waters and far horizons was more likable. Frost and the promise of winter thrilled him now, made him think of a wild battle between St. Regis and Groton, ages ago, seven years ago—and of an autumn day in France twelve months before when he had lain in tall grass, his platoon flattened down close around him, waiting to tap the shoulders of a Lewis gunner.	something crude or unrefined

close around him, waiting to tap the shoulders of a Lewis gunner.	Nature as a rather coarse phenomenon composed largely of flowers that, when closely inspected, appeared moth-eaten, and of ants that endlessly traversed blades of grass, was always disillusioning; nature represented by skies and waters and far horizons was more likable. Frost and the promise of winter thrilled him now, made him think of a wild battle between St. Regis and Groton, ages ago, seven years ago—and of an autumn day in France twelve months before when he had lain in tall grass, his platoon flattened down close around him, waiting to tap the shoulders of a Lewis gunner. He saw the two pictures together with somewhat the same primitive exaltation—two games he had played, differing in quality of acerbity, linked in a way that differed them from Rosalind or the subject of labyrinths which were, after all, the business of life.	right next to him, waiting to signal the machine gunner.

a Lewis gunner	Nature as a rather coarse phenomenon composed largely of flowers that, when closely inspected, appeared moth-eaten, and of ants that endlessly traversed blades of grass, was always disillusioning; nature represented by skies and waters and far horizons was more likable. Frost and the promise of winter thrilled him now, made him think of a wild battle between St. Regis and Groton, ages ago, seven years ago—and of an autumn day in France twelve months before when he had lain in tall grass, his platoon flattened down close around him, waiting to tap the shoulders of a Lewis gunner. He saw the two pictures together with somewhat the same primitive exaltation—two games he had played, differing in quality of acerbity, linked in a way that differed them from Rosalind or the subject of labyrinths which were, after all, the business of life.	a machine gunner

subject of labyrinths which were, after all, the business of life.	Frost and the promise of winter thrilled him now, made him think of a wild battle between St. Regis and Groton, ages ago, seven years ago—and of an autumn day in France twelve months before when he had lain in tall grass, his platoon flattened down close around him, waiting to tap the shoulders of a Lewis gunner. He saw the two pictures together with somewhat the same primitive exaltation—two games he had played, differing in quality of acerbity, linked in a way that differed them from Rosalind or the subject of labyrinths which were, after all, the business of life. “I am selfish,” he thought.	the study of complex problems, which is what life is all about.

somewhat the same primitive exaltation	Frost and the promise of winter thrilled him now, made him think of a wild battle between St. Regis and Groton, ages ago, seven years ago—and of an autumn day in France twelve months before when he had lain in tall grass, his platoon flattened down close around him, waiting to tap the shoulders of a Lewis gunner. He saw the two pictures together with somewhat the same primitive exaltation—two games he had played, differing in quality of acerbity, linked in a way that differed them from Rosalind or the subject of labyrinths which were, after all, the business of life. “I am selfish,” he thought.	a similar feeling of raw excitement

quality that will change when I ‘see human suffering’ or ‘lose my parents’ or ‘help others.’	“I am selfish,” he thought. “This is not a quality that will change when I ‘see human suffering’ or ‘lose my parents’ or ‘help others.’ “This selfishness is not only part of me.	a trait that will go away if I "see people in pain," "my parents die," or "I help people."

bring poise and balance into my life.	It is the most living part. “It is by somehow transcending rather than by avoiding that selfishness that I can bring poise and balance into my life. “There is no virtue of unselfishness that I cannot use.	make my life calm and balanced.

unselfishness that I cannot use.	“It is by somehow transcending rather than by avoiding that selfishness that I can bring poise and balance into my life. “There is no virtue of unselfishness that I cannot use. I can make sacrifices, be charitable, give to a friend, endure for a friend, lay down my life for a friend—all because these things may be the best possible expression of myself; yet I have not one drop of the milk of human kindness.”	I can use every kind of unselfishness.

drop of the milk of human kindness.”	“There is no virtue of unselfishness that I cannot use. I can make sacrifices, be charitable, give to a friend, endure for a friend, lay down my life for a friend—all because these things may be the best possible expression of myself; yet I have not one drop of the milk of human kindness.” The problem of evil had solidified for Amory into the problem of sex.	a shred of human compassion.

human kindness	“There is no virtue of unselfishness that I cannot use. I can make sacrifices, be charitable, give to a friend, endure for a friend, lay down my life for a friend—all because these things may be the best possible expression of myself; yet I have not one drop of the milk of human kindness.” The problem of evil had solidified for Amory into the problem of sex.	caring about others

solidified for Amory into the problem of sex.	I can make sacrifices, be charitable, give to a friend, endure for a friend, lay down my life for a friend—all because these things may be the best possible expression of myself; yet I have not one drop of the milk of human kindness.” The problem of evil had solidified for Amory into the problem of sex. He was beginning to identify evil with the strong phallic worship in Brooke and the early Wells.	became, for Amory, the problem of sex.

identify evil with the strong phallic worship in Brooke and the early Wells.	The problem of evil had solidified for Amory into the problem of sex. He was beginning to identify evil with the strong phallic worship in Brooke and the early Wells. Inseparably linked with evil was beauty—beauty, still a constant rising tumult; soft in Eleanor’s voice, in an old song at night, rioting deliriously through life like superimposed waterfalls, half rhythm, half darkness.	equate evil with the intense focus on sexuality in Brooke and the early Wells.

the strong phallic worship	The problem of evil had solidified for Amory into the problem of sex. He was beginning to identify evil with the strong phallic worship in Brooke and the early Wells. Inseparably linked with evil was beauty—beauty, still a constant rising tumult; soft in Eleanor’s voice, in an old song at night, rioting deliriously through life like superimposed waterfalls, half rhythm, half darkness.	a strong focus on sex

Eleanor’s voice	He was beginning to identify evil with the strong phallic worship in Brooke and the early Wells. Inseparably linked with evil was beauty—beauty, still a constant rising tumult; soft in Eleanor’s voice, in an old song at night, rioting deliriously through life like superimposed waterfalls, half rhythm, half darkness. Amory knew that every time he had reached toward it longingly it had leered out at him with the grotesque face of evil.	Eleanor's voice

still a constant rising tumult	He was beginning to identify evil with the strong phallic worship in Brooke and the early Wells. Inseparably linked with evil was beauty—beauty, still a constant rising tumult; soft in Eleanor’s voice, in an old song at night, rioting deliriously through life like superimposed waterfalls, half rhythm, half darkness. Amory knew that every time he had reached toward it longingly it had leered out at him with the grotesque face of evil.	still a constantly growing chaos

beauty—beauty, still a constant rising tumult; soft in Eleanor’s voice, in an old song at night, rioting deliriously through life like superimposed waterfalls, half rhythm, half darkness.	He was beginning to identify evil with the strong phallic worship in Brooke and the early Wells. Inseparably linked with evil was beauty—beauty, still a constant rising tumult; soft in Eleanor’s voice, in an old song at night, rioting deliriously through life like superimposed waterfalls, half rhythm, half darkness. Amory knew that every time he had reached toward it longingly it had leered out at him with the grotesque face of evil.	Beauty—beauty, still a constant, rising chaos; soft in Eleanor’s voice, in an old song at night, wildly rampaging through life like overlapping waterfalls, part rhythm, part darkness.

superimposed waterfalls	He was beginning to identify evil with the strong phallic worship in Brooke and the early Wells. Inseparably linked with evil was beauty—beauty, still a constant rising tumult; soft in Eleanor’s voice, in an old song at night, rioting deliriously through life like superimposed waterfalls, half rhythm, half darkness. Amory knew that every time he had reached toward it longingly it had leered out at him with the grotesque face of evil.	waterfalls layered on top of each other

reached toward it longingly it had leered out at him with the grotesque face of evil.	Inseparably linked with evil was beauty—beauty, still a constant rising tumult; soft in Eleanor’s voice, in an old song at night, rioting deliriously through life like superimposed waterfalls, half rhythm, half darkness. Amory knew that every time he had reached toward it longingly it had leered out at him with the grotesque face of evil. Beauty of great art, beauty of all joy, most of all the beauty of women.	he had reached for it, wanting it so badly, it had mocked him with evil's ugly face.

the grotesque face	Inseparably linked with evil was beauty—beauty, still a constant rising tumult; soft in Eleanor’s voice, in an old song at night, rioting deliriously through life like superimposed waterfalls, half rhythm, half darkness. Amory knew that every time he had reached toward it longingly it had leered out at him with the grotesque face of evil. Beauty of great art, beauty of all joy, most of all the beauty of women.	the ugly face

Beauty of great art, beauty of all joy, most of all the beauty of women.	Amory knew that every time he had reached toward it longingly it had leered out at him with the grotesque face of evil. Beauty of great art, beauty of all joy, most of all the beauty of women. After all, it had too many associations with license and indulgence.	Beautiful art, all joyful things, and especially beautiful women.

associations with license and indulgence.	Beauty of great art, beauty of all joy, most of all the beauty of women. After all, it had too many associations with license and indulgence. Weak things were often beautiful, weak things were never good.	linked to being immoral and self-indulgent.

only a discord	Weak things were often beautiful, weak things were never good. And in this new loneness of his that had been selected for what greatness he might achieve, beauty must be relative or, itself a harmony, it would make only a discord. In a sense this gradual renunciation of beauty was the second step after his disillusion had been made complete.	would create disharmony

this new loneness	Weak things were often beautiful, weak things were never good. And in this new loneness of his that had been selected for what greatness he might achieve, beauty must be relative or, itself a harmony, it would make only a discord. In a sense this gradual renunciation of beauty was the second step after his disillusion had been made complete.	this new solitude

loneness of his that had been selected for what greatness he might achieve, beauty must be relative or, itself a harmony, it would make only a discord.	Weak things were often beautiful, weak things were never good. And in this new loneness of his that had been selected for what greatness he might achieve, beauty must be relative or, itself a harmony, it would make only a discord. In a sense this gradual renunciation of beauty was the second step after his disillusion had been made complete.	His solitude, chosen for the great things he might do, meant beauty had to be redefined, or its natural harmony would create conflict.

step after his disillusion had been made complete.	And in this new loneness of his that had been selected for what greatness he might achieve, beauty must be relative or, itself a harmony, it would make only a discord. In a sense this gradual renunciation of beauty was the second step after his disillusion had been made complete. He felt that he was leaving behind him his chance of being a certain type of artist.	step after he'd completely lost his illusions.

this gradual renunciation	And in this new loneness of his that had been selected for what greatness he might achieve, beauty must be relative or, itself a harmony, it would make only a discord. In a sense this gradual renunciation of beauty was the second step after his disillusion had been made complete. He felt that he was leaving behind him his chance of being a certain type of artist.	giving up bit by bit

chance of being a certain type of artist.	In a sense this gradual renunciation of beauty was the second step after his disillusion had been made complete. He felt that he was leaving behind him his chance of being a certain type of artist. It seemed so much more important to be a certain sort of man.	opportunity to be a particular kind of artist.

thinking of the Catholic Church.	It seemed so much more important to be a certain sort of man. His mind turned a corner suddenly and he found himself thinking of the Catholic Church. The idea was strong in him that there was a certain intrinsic lack in those to whom orthodox religion was necessary, and religion to Amory meant the Church of Rome.	thinking about the Catholic Church.

a certain intrinsic lack	His mind turned a corner suddenly and he found himself thinking of the Catholic Church. The idea was strong in him that there was a certain intrinsic lack in those to whom orthodox religion was necessary, and religion to Amory meant the Church of Rome. Quite conceivably it was an empty ritual but it was seemingly the only assimilative, traditionary bulwark against the decay of morals.	a basic need

strong in him that there was a certain intrinsic lack in those to whom orthodox religion was necessary, and religion to Amory meant the Church of Rome.	His mind turned a corner suddenly and he found himself thinking of the Catholic Church. The idea was strong in him that there was a certain intrinsic lack in those to whom orthodox religion was necessary, and religion to Amory meant the Church of Rome. Quite conceivably it was an empty ritual but it was seemingly the only assimilative, traditionary bulwark against the decay of morals.	He felt strongly that people who needed traditional religion were somehow incomplete, and for him, religion meant the Catholic Church.

orthodox religion	His mind turned a corner suddenly and he found himself thinking of the Catholic Church. The idea was strong in him that there was a certain intrinsic lack in those to whom orthodox religion was necessary, and religion to Amory meant the Church of Rome. Quite conceivably it was an empty ritual but it was seemingly the only assimilative, traditionary bulwark against the decay of morals.	traditional religion

bulwark against the decay of morals.	The idea was strong in him that there was a certain intrinsic lack in those to whom orthodox religion was necessary, and religion to Amory meant the Church of Rome. Quite conceivably it was an empty ritual but it was seemingly the only assimilative, traditionary bulwark against the decay of morals. Until the great mobs could be educated into a moral sense someone must cry: “Thou shalt not!”	protection against the decline of moral values.

an empty ritual	The idea was strong in him that there was a certain intrinsic lack in those to whom orthodox religion was necessary, and religion to Amory meant the Church of Rome. Quite conceivably it was an empty ritual but it was seemingly the only assimilative, traditionary bulwark against the decay of morals. Until the great mobs could be educated into a moral sense someone must cry: “Thou shalt not!”	meaningless tradition

the only assimilative, traditionary bulwark	The idea was strong in him that there was a certain intrinsic lack in those to whom orthodox religion was necessary, and religion to Amory meant the Church of Rome. Quite conceivably it was an empty ritual but it was seemingly the only assimilative, traditionary bulwark against the decay of morals. Until the great mobs could be educated into a moral sense someone must cry: “Thou shalt not!”	the only unifying, traditional defense

cry: “Thou shalt not!”	Quite conceivably it was an empty ritual but it was seemingly the only assimilative, traditionary bulwark against the decay of morals. Until the great mobs could be educated into a moral sense someone must cry: “Thou shalt not!” Yet any acceptance was, for the present, impossible.	say: "You must not!"

the great mobs	Quite conceivably it was an empty ritual but it was seemingly the only assimilative, traditionary bulwark against the decay of morals. Until the great mobs could be educated into a moral sense someone must cry: “Thou shalt not!” Yet any acceptance was, for the present, impossible.	the large crowds

ulterior pressure	Yet any acceptance was, for the present, impossible. He wanted time and the absence of ulterior pressure. He wanted to keep the tree without ornaments, realize fully the direction and momentum of this new start.	hidden pressure

absence of ulterior pressure.	Yet any acceptance was, for the present, impossible. He wanted time and the absence of ulterior pressure. He wanted to keep the tree without ornaments, realize fully the direction and momentum of this new start.	freedom from hidden agendas.

wanted to keep the tree without ornaments, realize fully the direction and momentum of this new start.	He wanted time and the absence of ulterior pressure. He wanted to keep the tree without ornaments, realize fully the direction and momentum of this new start. The afternoon waned from the purging good of three o’clock to the golden beauty of four.	He wanted to keep things simple and fully understand where this new beginning was headed.

three o’clock	He wanted to keep the tree without ornaments, realize fully the direction and momentum of this new start. The afternoon waned from the purging good of three o’clock to the golden beauty of four. Afterward he walked through the dull ache of a setting sun when even the clouds seemed bleeding and at twilight he came to a graveyard.	3 PM

good of three o’clock to the golden beauty of four.	He wanted to keep the tree without ornaments, realize fully the direction and momentum of this new start. The afternoon waned from the purging good of three o’clock to the golden beauty of four. Afterward he walked through the dull ache of a setting sun when even the clouds seemed bleeding and at twilight he came to a graveyard.	from the positive feeling of 3 PM to the beautiful golden light of 4 PM.

walked through the dull ache of a setting sun when even the clouds seemed bleeding and at twilight he came to a graveyard.	The afternoon waned from the purging good of three o’clock to the golden beauty of four. Afterward he walked through the dull ache of a setting sun when even the clouds seemed bleeding and at twilight he came to a graveyard. There was a dusky, dreamy smell of flowers and the ghost of a new moon in the sky and shadows everywhere.	walked as the sun set, making everything feel heavy, even the clouds looked like they were bleeding color, and as night began, he arrived at a graveyard.

the dull ache	The afternoon waned from the purging good of three o’clock to the golden beauty of four. Afterward he walked through the dull ache of a setting sun when even the clouds seemed bleeding and at twilight he came to a graveyard. There was a dusky, dreamy smell of flowers and the ghost of a new moon in the sky and shadows everywhere.	the dull ache

moon in the sky and shadows everywhere.	Afterward he walked through the dull ache of a setting sun when even the clouds seemed bleeding and at twilight he came to a graveyard. There was a dusky, dreamy smell of flowers and the ghost of a new moon in the sky and shadows everywhere. On an impulse he considered trying to open the door of a rusty iron vault built into the side of a hill; a vault washed clean and covered with late-blooming, weepy watery-blue flowers that might have grown from dead eyes, sticky to the touch with a sickening odor.	a moon was faintly visible and shadows were all around.

a dusky, dreamy smell	Afterward he walked through the dull ache of a setting sun when even the clouds seemed bleeding and at twilight he came to a graveyard. There was a dusky, dreamy smell of flowers and the ghost of a new moon in the sky and shadows everywhere. On an impulse he considered trying to open the door of a rusty iron vault built into the side of a hill; a vault washed clean and covered with late-blooming, weepy watery-blue flowers that might have grown from dead eyes, sticky to the touch with a sickening odor.	a faint, hazy scent

a rusty iron vault	There was a dusky, dreamy smell of flowers and the ghost of a new moon in the sky and shadows everywhere. On an impulse he considered trying to open the door of a rusty iron vault built into the side of a hill; a vault washed clean and covered with late-blooming, weepy watery-blue flowers that might have grown from dead eyes, sticky to the touch with a sickening odor. Amory wanted to feel “William Dayfield, 1864.”	a rusty iron safe

side of a hill; a vault washed clean and covered with late-blooming, weepy watery-blue flowers that might have grown from dead eyes, sticky to the touch with a sickening odor.	There was a dusky, dreamy smell of flowers and the ghost of a new moon in the sky and shadows everywhere. On an impulse he considered trying to open the door of a rusty iron vault built into the side of a hill; a vault washed clean and covered with late-blooming, weepy watery-blue flowers that might have grown from dead eyes, sticky to the touch with a sickening odor. Amory wanted to feel “William Dayfield, 1864.”	hillside; the vault was clean, covered with pale blue flowers blooming late in the season. They looked like they could have sprouted from dead eyes, and they had a sticky, sickening smell.

a sickening odor	There was a dusky, dreamy smell of flowers and the ghost of a new moon in the sky and shadows everywhere. On an impulse he considered trying to open the door of a rusty iron vault built into the side of a hill; a vault washed clean and covered with late-blooming, weepy watery-blue flowers that might have grown from dead eyes, sticky to the touch with a sickening odor. Amory wanted to feel “William Dayfield, 1864.”	a disgusting smell

late-blooming, weepy watery-blue flowers	There was a dusky, dreamy smell of flowers and the ghost of a new moon in the sky and shadows everywhere. On an impulse he considered trying to open the door of a rusty iron vault built into the side of a hill; a vault washed clean and covered with late-blooming, weepy watery-blue flowers that might have grown from dead eyes, sticky to the touch with a sickening odor. Amory wanted to feel “William Dayfield, 1864.”	flowers blooming late, with a drooping, watery-blue color

consider life in vain.	Amory wanted to feel “William Dayfield, 1864.” He wondered that graves ever made people consider life in vain. Somehow he could find nothing hopeless in having lived.	think life was pointless.

find nothing hopeless in having lived.	He wondered that graves ever made people consider life in vain. Somehow he could find nothing hopeless in having lived. All the broken columns and clasped hands and doves and angels meant romances.	see no reason to regret having lived.

clasped hands	Somehow he could find nothing hopeless in having lived. All the broken columns and clasped hands and doves and angels meant romances. He fancied that in a hundred years he would like having young people speculate as to whether his eyes were brown or blue, and he hoped quite passionately that his grave would have about it an air of many, many years ago.	handshakes

speculate as to whether his eyes were brown or blue, and he hoped quite passionately that his grave would have about it an air of many, many years ago.	All the broken columns and clasped hands and doves and angels meant romances. He fancied that in a hundred years he would like having young people speculate as to whether his eyes were brown or blue, and he hoped quite passionately that his grave would have about it an air of many, many years ago. It seemed strange that out of a row of Union soldiers two or three made him think of dead loves and dead lovers, when they were exactly like the rest, even to the yellowish moss.	wonder if his eyes were brown or blue, and he really hoped his grave would look very old.

dead loves and dead lovers	He fancied that in a hundred years he would like having young people speculate as to whether his eyes were brown or blue, and he hoped quite passionately that his grave would have about it an air of many, many years ago. It seemed strange that out of a row of Union soldiers two or three made him think of dead loves and dead lovers, when they were exactly like the rest, even to the yellowish moss. Long after midnight the towers and spires of Princeton were visible, with here and there a late-burning light—and suddenly out of the clear darkness the sound of bells.	past romances and partners

the yellowish moss	He fancied that in a hundred years he would like having young people speculate as to whether his eyes were brown or blue, and he hoped quite passionately that his grave would have about it an air of many, many years ago. It seemed strange that out of a row of Union soldiers two or three made him think of dead loves and dead lovers, when they were exactly like the rest, even to the yellowish moss. Long after midnight the towers and spires of Princeton were visible, with here and there a late-burning light—and suddenly out of the clear darkness the sound of bells.	yellowish moss

think of dead loves and dead lovers, when they were exactly like the rest, even to the yellowish moss.	He fancied that in a hundred years he would like having young people speculate as to whether his eyes were brown or blue, and he hoped quite passionately that his grave would have about it an air of many, many years ago. It seemed strange that out of a row of Union soldiers two or three made him think of dead loves and dead lovers, when they were exactly like the rest, even to the yellowish moss. Long after midnight the towers and spires of Princeton were visible, with here and there a late-burning light—and suddenly out of the clear darkness the sound of bells.	remind him of past romances and those who had died, even though they were just like everyone else, down to the yellowish moss on their uniforms.

dead statesmen	Long after midnight the towers and spires of Princeton were visible, with here and there a late-burning light—and suddenly out of the clear darkness the sound of bells. As an endless dream it went on; the spirit of the past brooding over a new generation, the chosen youth from the muddled, unchastened world, still fed romantically on the mistakes and half-forgotten dreams of dead statesmen and poets. Here was a new generation, shouting the old cries, learning the old creeds, through a revery of long days and nights; destined finally to go out into that dirty gray turmoil to follow love and pride; a new generation dedicated more than the last to the fear of poverty and the worship of success; grown up to find all Gods dead, all wars fought, all faiths in man shaken.	dead politicians

the muddled, unchastened world	Long after midnight the towers and spires of Princeton were visible, with here and there a late-burning light—and suddenly out of the clear darkness the sound of bells. As an endless dream it went on; the spirit of the past brooding over a new generation, the chosen youth from the muddled, unchastened world, still fed romantically on the mistakes and half-forgotten dreams of dead statesmen and poets. Here was a new generation, shouting the old cries, learning the old creeds, through a revery of long days and nights; destined finally to go out into that dirty gray turmoil to follow love and pride; a new generation dedicated more than the last to the fear of poverty and the worship of success; grown up to find all Gods dead, all wars fought, all faiths in man shaken.	the confused, undisciplined world

went on; the spirit of the past brooding over a new generation, the chosen youth from the muddled, unchastened world, still fed romantically on the mistakes and half-forgotten dreams of dead statesmen and poets.	Long after midnight the towers and spires of Princeton were visible, with here and there a late-burning light—and suddenly out of the clear darkness the sound of bells. As an endless dream it went on; the spirit of the past brooding over a new generation, the chosen youth from the muddled, unchastened world, still fed romantically on the mistakes and half-forgotten dreams of dead statesmen and poets. Here was a new generation, shouting the old cries, learning the old creeds, through a revery of long days and nights; destined finally to go out into that dirty gray turmoil to follow love and pride; a new generation dedicated more than the last to the fear of poverty and the worship of success; grown up to find all Gods dead, all wars fought, all faiths in man shaken.	continued; the past influencing a new generation, these privileged young people from a confused and undisciplined world, still idealistically inspired by the errors and fading visions of leaders and writers who are gone.

go out into that dirty gray turmoil to follow love and pride; a new generation dedicated more than the last to the fear of poverty and the worship of success; grown up to find all Gods dead, all wars fought, all faiths in man shaken.	As an endless dream it went on; the spirit of the past brooding over a new generation, the chosen youth from the muddled, unchastened world, still fed romantically on the mistakes and half-forgotten dreams of dead statesmen and poets. Here was a new generation, shouting the old cries, learning the old creeds, through a revery of long days and nights; destined finally to go out into that dirty gray turmoil to follow love and pride; a new generation dedicated more than the last to the fear of poverty and the worship of success; grown up to find all Gods dead, all wars fought, all faiths in man shaken. Amory, sorry for them, was still not sorry for himself—art, politics, religion, whatever his medium should be, he knew he was safe now, free from all hysteria—he could accept what was acceptable, roam, grow, rebel, sleep deep through many nights.	go out into the messy real world to pursue love and pride; a generation even more focused on avoiding poverty and admiring success than the one before; having grown up to realize that old beliefs are gone, all the major battles have been fought, and trust in humanity is weakened.

the old creeds	As an endless dream it went on; the spirit of the past brooding over a new generation, the chosen youth from the muddled, unchastened world, still fed romantically on the mistakes and half-forgotten dreams of dead statesmen and poets. Here was a new generation, shouting the old cries, learning the old creeds, through a revery of long days and nights; destined finally to go out into that dirty gray turmoil to follow love and pride; a new generation dedicated more than the last to the fear of poverty and the worship of success; grown up to find all Gods dead, all wars fought, all faiths in man shaken. Amory, sorry for them, was still not sorry for himself—art, politics, religion, whatever his medium should be, he knew he was safe now, free from all hysteria—he could accept what was acceptable, roam, grow, rebel, sleep deep through many nights.	old beliefs

that dirty gray turmoil	As an endless dream it went on; the spirit of the past brooding over a new generation, the chosen youth from the muddled, unchastened world, still fed romantically on the mistakes and half-forgotten dreams of dead statesmen and poets. Here was a new generation, shouting the old cries, learning the old creeds, through a revery of long days and nights; destined finally to go out into that dirty gray turmoil to follow love and pride; a new generation dedicated more than the last to the fear of poverty and the worship of success; grown up to find all Gods dead, all wars fought, all faiths in man shaken. Amory, sorry for them, was still not sorry for himself—art, politics, religion, whatever his medium should be, he knew he was safe now, free from all hysteria—he could accept what was acceptable, roam, grow, rebel, sleep deep through many nights.	that messy, depressing world

sleep deep through many nights.	Here was a new generation, shouting the old cries, learning the old creeds, through a revery of long days and nights; destined finally to go out into that dirty gray turmoil to follow love and pride; a new generation dedicated more than the last to the fear of poverty and the worship of success; grown up to find all Gods dead, all wars fought, all faiths in man shaken. Amory, sorry for them, was still not sorry for himself—art, politics, religion, whatever his medium should be, he knew he was safe now, free from all hysteria—he could accept what was acceptable, roam, grow, rebel, sleep deep through many nights. There was no God in his heart, he knew; his ideas were still in riot; there was ever the pain of memory; the regret for his lost youth—yet the waters of disillusion had left a deposit on his soul, responsibility and a love of life, the faint stirring of old ambitions and unrealized dreams.	sleep soundly for many nights.

pain of memory; the regret for his lost youth—yet the waters of disillusion had left a deposit on his soul, responsibility and a love of life, the faint stirring of old ambitions and unrealized dreams.	Amory, sorry for them, was still not sorry for himself—art, politics, religion, whatever his medium should be, he knew he was safe now, free from all hysteria—he could accept what was acceptable, roam, grow, rebel, sleep deep through many nights. There was no God in his heart, he knew; his ideas were still in riot; there was ever the pain of memory; the regret for his lost youth—yet the waters of disillusion had left a deposit on his soul, responsibility and a love of life, the faint stirring of old ambitions and unrealized dreams. But—oh, Rosalind!	The pain of memories and regret for his lost youth remained, but his disillusionment had left him with responsibility, a love of life, and a glimmer of his old ambitions and dreams.

old ambitions	Amory, sorry for them, was still not sorry for himself—art, politics, religion, whatever his medium should be, he knew he was safe now, free from all hysteria—he could accept what was acceptable, roam, grow, rebel, sleep deep through many nights. There was no God in his heart, he knew; his ideas were still in riot; there was ever the pain of memory; the regret for his lost youth—yet the waters of disillusion had left a deposit on his soul, responsibility and a love of life, the faint stirring of old ambitions and unrealized dreams. But—oh, Rosalind!	old goals

unrealized dreams	Amory, sorry for them, was still not sorry for himself—art, politics, religion, whatever his medium should be, he knew he was safe now, free from all hysteria—he could accept what was acceptable, roam, grow, rebel, sleep deep through many nights. There was no God in his heart, he knew; his ideas were still in riot; there was ever the pain of memory; the regret for his lost youth—yet the waters of disillusion had left a deposit on his soul, responsibility and a love of life, the faint stirring of old ambitions and unrealized dreams. But—oh, Rosalind!	dreams that never came true

the faint stirring	Amory, sorry for them, was still not sorry for himself—art, politics, religion, whatever his medium should be, he knew he was safe now, free from all hysteria—he could accept what was acceptable, roam, grow, rebel, sleep deep through many nights. There was no God in his heart, he knew; his ideas were still in riot; there was ever the pain of memory; the regret for his lost youth—yet the waters of disillusion had left a deposit on his soul, responsibility and a love of life, the faint stirring of old ambitions and unrealized dreams. But—oh, Rosalind!	a slight return

the crystalline, radiant sky	And he could not tell why the struggle was worth while, why he had determined to use to the utmost himself and his heritage from the personalities he had passed. He stretched out his arms to the crystalline, radiant sky. “I know myself,” he cried, “but that is all.”	the clear, bright sky

stretched out his arms to the crystalline, radiant sky.	And he could not tell why the struggle was worth while, why he had determined to use to the utmost himself and his heritage from the personalities he had passed. He stretched out his arms to the crystalline, radiant sky. “I know myself,” he cried, “but that is all.”	He reached his arms out to the clear, bright sky.

He looked at it unmoved.	The first thing that met his glance was a photograph of Rosalind that he had intended to have framed, propped up against a mirror on his dresser. He looked at it unmoved. After the vivid mental pictures of her that were his portion at present, the portrait was curiously unreal.	He looked at it without feeling anything.

A good and virtuous nature may recoil In an imperial charge.	But Macbeth is. A good and virtuous nature may recoil In an imperial charge. But I shall crave your pardon; That which you are my thoughts cannot transpose: Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell; Though all things foul would wear the brows of grace, Yet grace must still look so.	Even a good and moral person might be corrupted by power.

My dearest coz, I pray you, school yourself: but for your husband, He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows The fits o' the season.	My dearest coz, I pray you, school yourself: but for your husband, He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows The fits o' the season. I dare not speak much further; But cruel are the times, when we are traitors And do not know ourselves, when we hold rumour From what we fear, yet know not what we fear, But float upon a wild and violent sea Each way and move.	My dearest cousin, please, control yourself. As for your husband, he is noble, wise, sensible, and knows best what's going on right now.

That they did wake each other: I stood and heard them: But they did say their prayers, and address'd them Again to sleep.	There's one did laugh in's sleep, and one cried 'Murder!' That they did wake each other: I stood and heard them: But they did say their prayers, and address'd them Again to sleep.	They woke each other up. I stood and heard them. They said their prayers and then went back to sleep.

The violence of either grief or joy Their own enactures with themselves destroy: Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament; Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.	Most necessary ’tis that we forget To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt: What to ourselves in passion we propose, The passion ending, doth the purpose lose. The violence of either grief or joy Their own enactures with themselves destroy: Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament; Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident. This world is not for aye, nor ’tis not strange That even our loves should with our fortunes change; For ’tis a question left us yet to prove, Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love.	Extreme joy or sadness destroys its own plans: Where joy is greatest, grief is deepest; grief rejoices, joy grieves, over small things.

Kerry’s death was a blow, so was Jesse’s to a certain extent.	Of course to be a good one you’d have to give up those violent intrigues you used to tell me about, but you’d write better poetry if you were linked up to tall golden candlesticks and long, even chants, and even if the American priests are rather burgeois, as Beatrice used to say, still you need only go to the sporty churches, and I’ll introduce you to Monsignor Darcy who really is a wonder. Kerry’s death was a blow, so was Jesse’s to a certain extent. And I have a great curiosity to know what queer corner of the world has swallowed Burne.	Kerry's death hurt, and Jesse's did too, a little.

for her neck Kissed over close, wears yet a purple speck Wherein the pained blood falters and goes out; Soft and stung softly—fairer for a fleck.”	Kerry, who saw through his poetic patter to the solid, almost respectable depths within, was immensely amused and would have him recite poetry by the hour, while he lay with closed eyes on Amory’s sofa and listened: “Asleep or waking is it? for her neck Kissed over close, wears yet a purple speck Wherein the pained blood falters and goes out; Soft and stung softly—fairer for a fleck.” “That’s good,” Kerry would say softly.	Her neck, kissed intensely, still shows a purple mark where the blood struggles and fades; a gentle sting, making her even more beautiful for the imperfection.

The very conveyances of his lands will hardly lie in this box; and must the inheritor himself have no more, ha?	will his vouchers vouch him no more of his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very conveyances of his lands will hardly lie in this box; and must the inheritor himself have no more, ha?	The deeds to all his land barely fit in this box, and that's all the heir gets, huh?

The sea, he thought, had treasured its memories deeper than the faithless land.	Amory paced the board walk at day’s end, lulled by the everlasting surge of changing waves, smelling the half-mournful odor of the salt breeze. The sea, he thought, had treasured its memories deeper than the faithless land. It seemed still to whisper of Norse galleys ploughing the water world under raven-figured flags, of the British dreadnoughts, gray bulwarks of civilization steaming up through the fog of one dark July into the North Sea.	He thought the sea held onto its memories better than the unreliable land.

This meant nothing to him, his metrical education having been confined to such Sunday classics as Come Into the Garden, Maude, and what morsels of Shakespeare and Milton had been recently forced upon him.	He spelled out the name and title upside down—Marpessa, by Stephen Phillips. This meant nothing to him, his metrical education having been confined to such Sunday classics as Come Into the Garden, Maude, and what morsels of Shakespeare and Milton had been recently forced upon him. Moved to address his vis-à-vis, he simulated interest in his book for a moment, and then exclaimed aloud as if involuntarily: “Ha! Great stuff!”	The name meant nothing to him because he'd only been taught simple, popular poems and bits of Shakespeare and Milton that he was made to read recently.

“Lots of money in advertising.”	“Writing copy for an advertising agency.” “Lots of money in advertising.” Amory smiled discreetly.	"There's a lot of money to be made in advertising."

He sold all his possessions and came down to the room to say goodbye, with a battered old bicycle, on which he intended to ride to his home in Pennsylvania.	“Burne’s a fanatic,” he said to Tom, “and he’s dead wrong and, I’m inclined to think, just an unconscious pawn in the hands of anarchistic publishers and German-paid rag wavers—but he haunts me—just leaving everything worth while—” Burne left in a quietly dramatic manner a week later. He sold all his possessions and came down to the room to say goodbye, with a battered old bicycle, on which he intended to ride to his home in Pennsylvania. “Peter the Hermit bidding farewell to Cardinal Richelieu,” suggested Alec, who was lounging in the window-seat as Burne and Amory shook hands.	He sold everything he owned and came to the room to say goodbye, with a beat-up old bicycle he planned to ride to his home in Pennsylvania.

The mystical reveries of saints that had once filled him with awe in the still hours of night, now vaguely repelled him.	Amory had grown up to a thousand books, a thousand lies; he had listened eagerly to people who pretended to know, who knew nothing. The mystical reveries of saints that had once filled him with awe in the still hours of night, now vaguely repelled him. The Byrons and Brookes who had defied life from mountain tops were in the end but flaneurs and poseurs, at best mistaking the shadow of courage for the substance of wisdom.	The spiritual dreams of saints, which once filled him with awe late at night, now slightly disgusted him.

Well, march we on, To give obedience where 'tis truly owed:	Well, march we on, To give obedience where 'tis truly owed: Meet we the medicine of the sickly weal, And with him pour we in our country's purge Each drop of us.	Let's march on to give our loyalty to where it truly belongs.

Use them after your own honour and dignity: the less they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty.	God’s bodykins, man, much better: use every man after his desert, and who should ’scape whipping? Use them after your own honour and dignity: the less they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty. Take them in.	Treat people according to your own sense of honor and worth. The less they deserve, the more virtuous it is of you to be generous.

And thane of Cawdor too: went it not so?	And thane of Cawdor too: went it not so?	And also the Thane of Cawdor: wasn't that right?

“Not by a darned sight—unless we’re all children.	“Kids—child’s play!” scoffed his antagonist. “Not by a darned sight—unless we’re all children. Did you ever see a grown man when he’s trying for a secret society—or a rising family whose name is up at some club?	"Not even close—unless we're all acting like kids."

Ay, sir; to be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man picked out of ten thousand.	Ay, sir; to be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man picked out of ten thousand.	Yes, sir; in today's world, being honest is like finding one person out of ten thousand.

Dean Hollister had been heard by a large group arguing with a taxi-driver, who had driven him from the junction.	Then he remembered an incident of sophomore year, in which Burne had been suspected of the leading role. Dean Hollister had been heard by a large group arguing with a taxi-driver, who had driven him from the junction. In the course of the altercation the dean remarked that he “might as well buy the taxicab.”	A lot of people heard Dean Hollister arguing with a taxi driver who had taken him from the junction.

Till then sit still, my soul: foul deeds will rise, Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s eyes.	all is not well; I doubt some foul play: would the night were come! Till then sit still, my soul: foul deeds will rise, Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s eyes. (Exit.)	Until then, be patient, my soul: evil actions will come to light, even if they're buried deep.

But you see, I’ve always felt that Stephen’s death was the thing that occurred to Paul on the road to Damascus, and sent him to preach the word of Christ all over the world.”	He probably thought as he was dying what a waste it all was. But you see, I’ve always felt that Stephen’s death was the thing that occurred to Paul on the road to Damascus, and sent him to preach the word of Christ all over the world.” “Go on.”	I've always felt Stephen's death was the event that inspired Paul on the road to Damascus, and motivated him to spread the teachings of Christ across the world.

Who's there, i' the name of Beelzebub?	Knock, knock, knock! Who's there, i' the name of Beelzebub? Here's a farmer, that hanged himself on the expectation of plenty: come in time; have napkins enow about you; here you'll sweat for't.	Who's there, in the name of the Devil?

 Amory moved forward on the deck until he found a stool under an electric light.	Amory moved forward on the deck until he found a stool under an electric light. He searched in his pocket for notebook and pencil and then began to write, slowly, laboriously: “We leave tonight.	Amory walked further onto the deck until he found a stool under a light.

Your wisdom should show itself more richer to signify this to his doctor; for, for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps plunge him into far more choler.	Your wisdom should show itself more richer to signify this to his doctor; for, for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps plunge him into far more choler.	You should use your better judgment to tell his doctor about this, because if I try to give him medicine to cleanse his system, it might make him even angrier.

There were three private cars; however, no one slept except in the third car, which was called the “animal car,” and where were herded the spectacled windjammers of the orchestra.	There was a proper consumption of strong waters all along the line; one man invariably went on the stage highly stimulated, claiming that his particular interpretation of the part required it. There were three private cars; however, no one slept except in the third car, which was called the “animal car,” and where were herded the spectacled windjammers of the orchestra. Everything was so hurried that there was no time to be bored, but when they arrived in Philadelphia, with vacation nearly over, there was rest in getting out of the heavy atmosphere of flowers and greasepaint, and the ponies took off their corsets with abdominal pains and sighs of relief.	They had three private train cars, but only the musicians in the third car (nicknamed the "animal car") slept there.

“Well,” said Amory, “I simply state that I’m a product of a versatile mind in a restless generation—with every reason to throw my mind and pen in with the radicals.	To the last farthing.” “Well,” said Amory, “I simply state that I’m a product of a versatile mind in a restless generation—with every reason to throw my mind and pen in with the radicals. Even if, deep in my heart, I thought we were all blind atoms in a world as limited as a stroke of a pendulum, I and my sort would struggle against tradition; try, at least, to displace old cants with new ones.	"Okay," Amory said, "I'm just saying that I'm the result of a flexible mind in a troubled time, and I have every reason to support the revolutionaries with my thoughts and writing."

The stag line is a most homogeneous mass of men.	They danced away the prom until five, and the stags cut in on Isabelle with joyous abandon, which grew more and more enthusiastic as the hour grew late, and their wines, stored in overcoat pockets in the coat room, made old weariness wait until another day. The stag line is a most homogeneous mass of men. It fairly sways with a single soul.	The group of single men is very much alike.

cried the noisy man.	“You let go that girl!” cried the noisy man. Amory tried to make his eyes threatening.	yelled the noisy man.

Amory stepped inside and divested himself of cap and coat.	A butler (one of the three in Minneapolis) swung open the door. Amory stepped inside and divested himself of cap and coat. He was mildly surprised not to hear the shrill squawk of conversation from the next room, and he decided it must be quite formal.	Amory stepped inside and took off his hat and coat.

Let our just censures Attend the true event, and put we on Industrious soldiership.	Let our just censures Attend the true event, and put we on Industrious soldiership.	Let's judge fairly when we know the outcome, and let's be diligent soldiers.

I knew that if I were the dog or the convict or the ghost I wouldn’t be a menace to Burne Holiday any more than he was a menace to me.	That made it all right—as it always makes everything all right to project yourself completely into another’s place. I knew that if I were the dog or the convict or the ghost I wouldn’t be a menace to Burne Holiday any more than he was a menace to me. Then I thought of my watch.	If I were the dog, the convict, or the ghost, I wouldn't be a threat to Burne Holiday, just as he wasn't a threat to me.

Los’ idealism, got be physcal anmal,” he shook his fist expressively at Old King Cole, “got be Prussian ’bout ev’thing, women ’specially.	“Two years my life spent inalleshual vacuity. Los’ idealism, got be physcal anmal,” he shook his fist expressively at Old King Cole, “got be Prussian ’bout ev’thing, women ’specially. Use’ be straight ’bout women college.	Los's idealism needs to be more grounded and animalistic," he shook his fist expressively at Old King Cole, "needs to be strict about everything, especially women.

What leered out of the dark in the ghostly clover?	What did the last night hold, with the summer over, Drawing us back to the home in the changing glade? What leered out of the dark in the ghostly clover? God!.	What evil thing glared from the darkness in the eerie clover?

“We’ll go over to Shanley’s,” suggested Carling, offering an elbow.	He settled his coat with an attempt at nonchalance, but letting go of the bar was too much for him, and he slumped against a chair. “We’ll go over to Shanley’s,” suggested Carling, offering an elbow. With this assistance Amory managed to get his legs in motion enough to propel him across Forty-second Street.	"Let's go to Shanley's," Carling said, offering his arm for support.

 Monsignor Darcy invited Amory up to the Stuart palace on the Hudson for a week at Christmas, and they had enormous conversations around the open fire.	Monsignor Darcy invited Amory up to the Stuart palace on the Hudson for a week at Christmas, and they had enormous conversations around the open fire. Monsignor was growing a trifle stouter and his personality had expanded even with that, and Amory felt both rest and security in sinking into a squat, cushioned chair and joining him in the middle-aged sanity of a cigar.	Monsignor Darcy invited Amory to his place, the Stuart palace on the Hudson, for a week over Christmas, and they had long talks by the fire.

It was cold, and he started on a steady run for the light that showed the street at the other end.	Minutes later he sprang to his feet, realizing dimly that there was no more sound, and that he was alone in the graying alley. It was cold, and he started on a steady run for the light that showed the street at the other end.	It was cold, and he started running towards the light at the end of the alley.

Existence had settled back to an ambitionless normality.	“Now you save any idea that you think would do to print.” Existence had settled back to an ambitionless normality. They had decided that with economy they could still afford the apartment, which Tom, with the domesticity of an elderly cat, had grown fond of.	Life had become ordinary and without ambition again.

Within a week after the receipt of this letter their little household fell precipitously to pieces.	With greatest affection, Thayer Darcy. Within a week after the receipt of this letter their little household fell precipitously to pieces. The immediate cause was the serious and probably chronic illness of Tom’s mother.	Within a week of getting this letter, their family life suddenly fell apart.

Every night the gymnasium echoed as platoon after platoon swept over the floor and shuffled out the basketball markings.	Slowly and inevitably, yet with a sudden surge at the last, while Amory talked and dreamed, war rolled swiftly up the beach and washed the sands where Princeton played. Every night the gymnasium echoed as platoon after platoon swept over the floor and shuffled out the basketball markings. When Amory went to Washington the next weekend he caught some of the spirit of crisis which changed to repulsion in the Pullman car coming back, for the berths across from him were occupied by stinking aliens—Greeks, he guessed, or Russians.	Each night, the gym resounded with the sound of endless platoons marching across the floor, erasing the basketball court lines.

Why then, God's soldier be he!	Why then, God's soldier be he! Had I as many sons as I have hairs, I would not wish them to a fairer death: And so, his knell is knoll'd.	Well then, let him be God's soldier!

This was followed by an indistinguishable song that included much stamping and then by an endless, incoherent dirge.	A group began whistling “By the Sea,” and the audience took it up noisily. This was followed by an indistinguishable song that included much stamping and then by an endless, incoherent dirge. “Oh-h-h-h-h	After that, they played a song you couldn't make out with a lot of stamping, and then a long, rambling, and depressing song.

“They pick up old, moth-eaten London accents that are down on their luck and have to be used by someone.	“They have accents, my dear,” she told Amory, “not Southern accents or Boston accents, not an accent attached to any locality, just an accent”—she became dreamy. “They pick up old, moth-eaten London accents that are down on their luck and have to be used by someone. They talk as an English butler might after several years in a Chicago grand-opera company.”	"They adopt these old, worn-out London accents that are so bad, nobody else wants them."

He spelled out the name and title upside down—Marpessa, by Stephen Phillips.	By and by Amory’s eyes wandered curiously to his fellow-luncher’s book. He spelled out the name and title upside down—Marpessa, by Stephen Phillips. This meant nothing to him, his metrical education having been confined to such Sunday classics as Come Into the Garden, Maude, and what morsels of Shakespeare and Milton had been recently forced upon him.	He read the name and title upside down—Marpessa, by Stephen Phillips.

On the contrary, Amory felt an immense desire to give people a sense of security.	Life opened up in one of its amazing bursts of radiance and Amory suddenly and permanently rejected an old epigram that had been playing listlessly in his mind: “Very few things matter and nothing matters very much.” On the contrary, Amory felt an immense desire to give people a sense of security.	Instead, Amory really wanted to make people feel safe and secure.

What this man here just said has been for thousands of years the last refuge of the associated muttonheads of the world.	I can name offhand over one hundred natural phenomena that have been changed by the will of man—a hundred instincts in man that have been wiped out or are now held in check by civilization. What this man here just said has been for thousands of years the last refuge of the associated muttonheads of the world. It negates the efforts of every scientist, statesman, moralist, reformer, doctor, and philosopher that ever gave his life to humanity’s service.	What that man just said has been the excuse of fools for ages.

“No, sir, not by a darn sight,” said the worldly youth with emphasis, “and I know that girl’s as good as gold.	“I wonder about actresses; are they all pretty bad?” “No, sir, not by a darn sight,” said the worldly youth with emphasis, “and I know that girl’s as good as gold. I can tell.”	“No, sir, not at all,” the experienced young man said firmly, “and I know that girl is completely honest.

The Lord's anointed temple, and stole thence	Most sacrilegious murder hath broke ope The Lord's anointed temple, and stole thence The life o' the building!	God's chosen body, and stole the life from it!

Tom’s voice held an undertone of anxiety.	“Going out?” Tom’s voice held an undertone of anxiety. “Uh-huh.”	Tom sounded worried.

“I used to come out here alone at night, oh, three months ago, and I always stopped at that crossroad we just passed.	They were striding toward the woods, Burne’s nervous, enthusiastic voice warming to his subject. “I used to come out here alone at night, oh, three months ago, and I always stopped at that crossroad we just passed. There were the woods looming up ahead, just as they do now, there were dogs howling and the shadows and no human sound.	"I used to come out here by myself at night, about three months ago, and I always stopped at that crossroads we just walked by."

Her mother says that if you showed up by five-thirty you two was to go after ’em in the Packard.”	That’s you, ain’t it? Her mother says that if you showed up by five-thirty you two was to go after ’em in the Packard.” Amory’s despair was crystallized by the appearance of Myra herself, bundled to the ears in a polo coat, her face plainly sulky, her voice pleasant only with difficulty.	Her mother said if you got here by five-thirty, you two were supposed to go get them in the Packard.

“You going out for anything?” inquired Amory of the elder brother.	“Me either.” “You going out for anything?” inquired Amory of the elder brother. “Not me—Burne here is going out for the Prince—the Daily Princetonian, you know.”	"Are you trying out for anything?" Amory asked the older brother.

“He’s way over their heads—you know you think so yourself when you talk to him—Good Lord, Tom, you used to stand out against ‘people.’	“It’s a bad time to admit it—people are beginning to think he’s odd.” “He’s way over their heads—you know you think so yourself when you talk to him—Good Lord, Tom, you used to stand out against ‘people.’ Success has completely conventionalized you.”	"He's too smart for them—you know you think so too when you talk to him—Good grief, Tom, you used to not care what 'people' thought."

That now Sweno, the Norways' king, craves composition: Nor would we deign him burial of his men Till he disbursed at Saint Colme's inch Ten thousand dollars to our general use.	That now Sweno, the Norways' king, craves composition: Nor would we deign him burial of his men Till he disbursed at Saint Colme's inch Ten thousand dollars to our general use.	The King of Norway, Sweno, wants to negotiate peace. We wouldn't even let him bury his soldiers until he paid ten thousand dollars to our army at Saint Colme's inch.

He wore no shoes, but, instead, a sort of half moccasin, pointed, though, like the shoes they wore in the fourteenth century, and with the little ends curling up.	It was like weakness in a good woman, or blood on satin; one of those terrible incongruities that shake little things in the back of the brain. He wore no shoes, but, instead, a sort of half moccasin, pointed, though, like the shoes they wore in the fourteenth century, and with the little ends curling up. They were a darkish brown and his toes seemed to fill them to the end.	He wasn't wearing shoes, but a type of moccasin that came to a point like shoes from the 1300s, with the tips curling up.

As they settled to the lower floor the feet came into view in the sickly electric light of the paved hall.	those feet. As they settled to the lower floor the feet came into view in the sickly electric light of the paved hall.	As they reached the bottom floor, their feet became visible in the dim electric light of the tiled hallway.

To Ireland, I; our separated fortune Shall keep us both the safer: where we are, There's daggers in men's smiles: the near in blood, The nearer bloody.	To Ireland, I; our separated fortune Shall keep us both the safer: where we are, There's daggers in men's smiles: the near in blood, The nearer bloody.	I'm going to Ireland; our being apart will keep us both safer. Here, people smile but hide daggers, and family members are the most likely to kill you.

At her best she allied all with whom she came in contact—except older girls and some women.	Isabelle met them tactfully. At her best she allied all with whom she came in contact—except older girls and some women. All the impressions she made were conscious.	When she tried, she got along with everyone she met, except for older girls and some women.

The worthy thane of Ross.	The worthy thane of Ross.	The worthy thane of Ross.

He wore no shoes, but, instead, a sort of half moccasin, pointed, though, like the shoes they wore in the fourteenth century, and with the little ends curling up.	It was like weakness in a good woman, or blood on satin; one of those terrible incongruities that shake little things in the back of the brain. He wore no shoes, but, instead, a sort of half moccasin, pointed, though, like the shoes they wore in the fourteenth century, and with the little ends curling up. They were a darkish brown and his toes seemed to fill them to the end.	He wasn't wearing shoes, but a kind of moccasin slipper that was pointed like shoes from the 1300s, with the tips curled up.

she speaks: I will set down what comes from her, to satisfy my remembrance the more strongly.	Hark! she speaks: I will set down what comes from her, to satisfy my remembrance the more strongly.	She's talking: I'll write down what she says to remember it better.

“Food—” she said with a cheerful laugh.	“It does very well,” agreed Amory critically, and then as an afterthought: “It’s almost breakfast-time—do you want something to eat?” “Food—” she said with a cheerful laugh. “Food is what queered the party.	"Food," she said, laughing cheerfully.

Eleanor was, say, the last time that evil crept close to Amory under the mask of beauty, the last weird mystery that held him with wild fascination and pounded his soul to flakes.	The night when they rode up the slope and watched the cold moon float through the clouds, he lost a further part of him that nothing could restore; and when he lost it he lost also the power of regretting it. Eleanor was, say, the last time that evil crept close to Amory under the mask of beauty, the last weird mystery that held him with wild fascination and pounded his soul to flakes. With her his imagination ran riot and that is why they rode to the highest hill and watched an evil moon ride high, for they knew then that they could see the devil in each other.	Eleanor was, you could say, the last time evil disguised itself as beauty and got close to Amory, the last strange puzzle that captivated him and completely broke him down.

Hail to your lordship!	Hail to your lordship!	Hail to your lordship!

For this relief much thanks: ’tis bitter cold, And I am sick at heart.	For this relief much thanks: ’tis bitter cold, And I am sick at heart.	Thank you for that small comfort: it's bitterly cold, and I'm heartbroken.

with this background did Amory drift into adolescence.	Vanity, tempered with self-suspicion if not self-knowledge, a sense of people as automatons to his will, a desire to “pass” as many boys as possible and get to a vague top of the world. with this background did Amory drift into adolescence.	With this background, Amory drifted into adolescence.

They were like a slow dripping, with just the slightest insistence in their fall.	Ten, fifteen steps away sounded the footsteps. They were like a slow dripping, with just the slightest insistence in their fall. Amory’s shadow lay, perhaps, ten feet ahead of him, and soft shoes was presumably that far behind.	They sounded like slow drips, with a faint sense of purpose.

You brushed three or four ornaments down, and, in a fit of pique, knocked off the rest of them.	“Now you’ve a clean start—a start Kerry or Sloane can constitutionally never have. You brushed three or four ornaments down, and, in a fit of pique, knocked off the rest of them. The thing now is to collect some new ones, and the farther you look ahead in the collecting the better.	You knocked down a few ornaments and then, annoyed, knocked down the rest.

“Name of Kaluka, Hawaiian queen!	Kerry presented them formally. “Name of Kaluka, Hawaiian queen! Let me present Messrs. Connage, Sloane, Humbird, Ferrenby, and Blaine.”	I invoke the name of Queen Kaluka of Hawaii!

All the materialists rampant, all the idolizers of German science and efficiency.	all the people who cheered for Germany in 1870. All the materialists rampant, all the idolizers of German science and efficiency. So he sat one day in an English lecture and heard “Locksley Hall” quoted and fell into a brown study with contempt for Tennyson and all he stood for—for he took him as a representative of the Victorians.	All the rampant materialists, all those who worshipped German science and efficiency.

I honestly think that’s all pretty much rot, though it seemed to give sentimental comfort to those at home; and may make fathers and mothers appreciate their children.	I’ve only discovered one soldier who passed through the much-advertised spiritual crisis, like this fellow, Donald Hankey, and the one I knew was already studying for the ministry, so he was ripe for it. I honestly think that’s all pretty much rot, though it seemed to give sentimental comfort to those at home; and may make fathers and mothers appreciate their children. This crisis-inspired religion is rather valueless and fleeting at best.	I honestly think it's all nonsense, even though it seemed to give emotional comfort to families back home and might make parents appreciate their children more.

Infirm of purpose!	Infirm of purpose! Give me the daggers: the sleeping and the dead Are	Weak-willed!

As long as he occurs, there’s trouble and all the latent evil that makes a crowd list and sway when he talks.”	“He’s absolutely irreconcilable with any Utopia. As long as he occurs, there’s trouble and all the latent evil that makes a crowd list and sway when he talks.” “And of course all that he is is a gifted man without a moral sense.”	As long as he's around, there will be trouble, and he'll stir up the hidden evil in people, making crowds hang on his every word."

He had risen at noon, lunched with Mrs. Lawrence, and then ridden abstractedly homeward atop one of his beloved buses.	This particular day on which he announced his ennui to Tom had been quite typical. He had risen at noon, lunched with Mrs. Lawrence, and then ridden abstractedly homeward atop one of his beloved buses. “Why shouldn’t you be bored,” yawned Tom.	He got up at noon, had lunch with Mrs. Lawrence, and then rode home lost in thought on one of his favorite buses.

“You’re one man, Burne—going to talk to people who won’t listen—with all God’s given you.”	“I know what you mean, and that’s why I’m not sure I’ll agitate.” “You’re one man, Burne—going to talk to people who won’t listen—with all God’s given you.” “That’s what Stephen must have thought many years ago.	"You're just one person, Burne, trying to talk to people who won't listen, even with all your God-given gifts."

That he is mad, ’tis true: ’tis true ’tis pity; And pity ’tis ’tis true: a foolish figure; But farewell it, for I will use no art.	Madam, I swear I use no art at all. That he is mad, ’tis true: ’tis true ’tis pity; And pity ’tis ’tis true: a foolish figure; But farewell it, for I will use no art. Mad let us grant him, then: and now remains That we find out the cause of this effect, Or rather say, the cause of this defect, For this effect defective comes by cause: Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.	He's mad, that's true, and it's a shame that it's true. It's a shame it's true - this is a silly way of speaking, so I'll stop, because I'm not trying to be clever.

They seemed nearer, not only mentally, but physically, when they read, than when she was in his arms, and this was often, for they fell half into love almost from the first.	There was something most passionate in Eleanor’s reading aloud. They seemed nearer, not only mentally, but physically, when they read, than when she was in his arms, and this was often, for they fell half into love almost from the first. Yet was Amory capable of love now?	They felt closer, both mentally and physically, when they read together than when they were embracing, which happened a lot because they quickly started falling in love.

Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame and start not so wildly from my affair.	Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame and start not so wildly from my affair.	My lord, please focus your argument and don't stray so far from my issue.

They discussed the cousin thoroughly, and then Holiday announced that he was to meet his brother for dinner at six.	I had a cousin there.” They discussed the cousin thoroughly, and then Holiday announced that he was to meet his brother for dinner at six. “Come along and have a bite with us.”	They talked about the cousin in detail, and then Holiday said he was meeting his brother for dinner at six.

Then there’s always some crazy cross-eyed girl”—he gave a terrifying imitation—“she’s always talkin’ hard, sorta, to the chaperon.”	“There’s always a bunch of shy fellas,” he commented, “sitting at the tail of the bob, sorta lurkin’ an’ whisperin’ an’ pushin’ each other off. Then there’s always some crazy cross-eyed girl”—he gave a terrifying imitation—“she’s always talkin’ hard, sorta, to the chaperon.” “You’re such a funny boy,” puzzled Myra.	And there's always some wild, cross-eyed girl—he made a scary face to show what she looked like—"she's always talking really loudly, kind of, to the chaperone."

“To the celestial and my soul’s idol, the most beautified Ophelia,”—	(Reads.) “To the celestial and my soul’s idol, the most beautified Ophelia,”—	To the heavenly and adored Ophelia,—

Indeed, his mind was so crowded with dreams of athletic prowess at school that he considered this visit only as a rather tiresome prelude to the great adventure.	The metropolis, barely glimpsed, made little impression on him, except for the sense of cleanliness he drew from the tall white buildings seen from a Hudson River steamboat in the early morning. Indeed, his mind was so crowded with dreams of athletic prowess at school that he considered this visit only as a rather tiresome prelude to the great adventure. This, however, it did not prove to be.	He was so focused on his sports dreams at school that he saw the visit as just a boring introduction to the real excitement ahead.

“Hey, ponies!”	“Hey, ponies—how about easing up on that crap game and shaking a mean hip?” “Hey, ponies!” The coach fumed helplessly, the Triangle Club president, glowering with anxiety, varied between furious bursts of authority and fits of temperamental lassitude, when he sat spiritless and wondered how the devil the show was ever going on tour by Christmas.	Hey, guys!

Let’s follow; ’tis not fit thus to obey him.	Let’s follow; ’tis not fit thus to obey him.	Let's follow him; it's not right to obey him like this.

They were at the head of the stairs, and as Amory turned into his room he thought he caught just the faintest cloud of discontent in her face.	“Good night.” They were at the head of the stairs, and as Amory turned into his room he thought he caught just the faintest cloud of discontent in her face. He lay awake in the darkness and wondered how much he cared—how much of his sudden unhappiness was hurt vanity—whether he was, after all, temperamentally unfitted for romance.	They were at the top of the stairs, and as Amory went into his room he thought he saw a hint of unhappiness on her face.

Who cannot want the thought how monstrous It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain To kill their gracious father?	The gracious Duncan Was pitied of Macbeth: marry, he was dead: And the right-valiant Banquo walk'd too late; Whom, you may say, if't please you, Fleance kill'd, For Fleance fled: men must not walk too late. Who cannot want the thought how monstrous It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain To kill their gracious father? damned fact!	Who can forget how awful it was that Malcolm and Donalbain killed their kind father?

My pretty cousin, Blessing upon you!	but I'll be here again: Things at the worst will cease, or else climb upward To what they were before. My pretty cousin, Blessing upon you!	Bless you, my dear cousin!

Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead, Till of this flat a mountain you have made, To o’ertop old Pelion, or the skyish head Of blue Olympus.	Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead, Till of this flat a mountain you have made, To o’ertop old Pelion, or the skyish head Of blue Olympus.	Now pile your dust on the living and the dead, until you've made a mountain out of this flat land, taller than Mount Pelion or the peak of Mount Olympus.

Whate'er thou art, for thy good caution, thanks; Thou hast harp'd my fear aright: but one word more,—	Whate'er thou art, for thy good caution, thanks; Thou hast harp'd my fear aright: but one word more,—	Whoever you are, thank you for the good warning; you have struck my fear perfectly. But one more word—

New York burst upon him on Washington’s Birthday with the brilliance of a long-anticipated event.	There was a bright star in February. New York burst upon him on Washington’s Birthday with the brilliance of a long-anticipated event. His glimpse of it as a vivid whiteness against a deep-blue sky had left a picture of splendor that rivalled the dream cities in the Arabian Nights; but this time he saw it by electric light, and romance gleamed from the chariot-race sign on Broadway and from the women’s eyes at the Astor, where he and young Paskert from St. Regis’ had dinner.	New York hit him hard on Washington's Birthday, like a brilliant event he'd been waiting for.

But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?	Good even, sir. But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?	But why, really, are you here from Wittenberg?

Double, double toil and trouble; Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.	Double, double toil and trouble; Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.	Double, double, work and trouble; Fire burn and cauldron bubble.

“Kids—child’s play!” scoffed his antagonist.	If you’d gone to college you’d have been struck by the fact that the men there would work twice as hard for any one of a hundred petty honors as those other men did who were earning their way through.” “Kids—child’s play!” scoffed his antagonist. “Not by a darned sight—unless we’re all children.	"Kids—that's just messing around!" his opponent scoffed.

“Oh,” said Kerry respectfully, “these important men—” Amory flushed and it seemed to him that Ferrenby, a defeated competitor, winced a little.	I ought to make up tonight; but I can telephone back, I suppose.” “Oh,” said Kerry respectfully, “these important men—” Amory flushed and it seemed to him that Ferrenby, a defeated competitor, winced a little. Of course, Kerry was only kidding, but he really mustn’t mention the Princetonian.	"Oh," Kerry said, acting respectful, "these important guys—" Amory blushed, and he thought Ferrenby, who'd lost to him, flinched slightly.

Sailors, my lord, they say; I saw them not: They were given me by Claudio; he received them Of him that brought them.	Sailors, my lord, they say; I saw them not: They were given me by Claudio; he received them Of him that brought them.	They say they're sailors, my lord, but I didn't see them. Claudio gave them to me; he got them from the person who brought them.

He was where Goethe was when he began Faust; he was where Conrad was when he wrote Almayer’s Folly.	Amory was alone—he had escaped from a small enclosure into a great labyrinth. He was where Goethe was when he began Faust; he was where Conrad was when he wrote Almayer’s Folly. Amory said to himself that there were essentially two sorts of people who through natural clarity or disillusion left the enclosure and sought the labyrinth.	He was at the same point in his life as Goethe when he started Faust, and Conrad when he wrote Almayer's Folly.

“Morning, Mr. Barlow.”	Amory entered unsteadily. “Morning, Mr. Barlow.” Mr. Barlow brought his glasses to the inspection and set his mouth slightly ajar that he might better listen.	"Good morning, Mr. Barlow."

Banquo and Macbeth, all hail!	Banquo and Macbeth, all hail!	Banquo and Macbeth, all hail!

Though Birnam wood be come to Dunsinane, And thou opposed, being of no woman born, Yet I will try the last.	I will not yield, To kiss the ground before young Malcolm's feet, And to be baited with the rabble's curse. Though Birnam wood be come to Dunsinane, And thou opposed, being of no woman born, Yet I will try the last. Before my body I throw my warlike shield.	Even if Birnam Wood has come to Dunsinane, and even though you oppose me, and you weren't born of a woman, I will still fight to the very end.

Methinks it is like a weasel.	Methinks it is like a weasel.	I think it looks like a weasel.

Not in the legions Of horrid hell can come a devil more damn'd	Not in the legions Of horrid hell can come a devil more damn'd In evils to top Macbeth.	Even hell can't produce a devil more evil.

She was enjoying this immensely, and Froggy Parker was so engrossed with the added sparkle of her rising color that he forgot to pull out Sally’s chair, and fell into a dim confusion.	The dinner-table glittered with laughter at the confusion of getting places and then curious eyes were turned on her, sitting near the head. She was enjoying this immensely, and Froggy Parker was so engrossed with the added sparkle of her rising color that he forgot to pull out Sally’s chair, and fell into a dim confusion. Amory was on the other side, full of confidence and vanity, gazing at her in open admiration.	She loved the attention, and Froggy Parker was so fascinated by her blushing cheeks that he forgot to help Sally with her chair and became flustered.

What a wonderful song, she thought—everything was wonderful tonight, most of all this romantic scene in the den, with their hands clinging and the inevitable looming charmingly close.	“Moonlight is bright, Kiss me good night.” What a wonderful song, she thought—everything was wonderful tonight, most of all this romantic scene in the den, with their hands clinging and the inevitable looming charmingly close. The future vista of her life seemed an unending succession of scenes like this: under moonlight and pale starlight, and in the backs of warm limousines and in low, cosy roadsters stopped under sheltering trees—only the boy might change, and this one was so nice.	She thought the song was wonderful. Everything felt wonderful tonight, especially this romantic moment in the living room, holding hands and knowing a kiss was coming.

The day had put Amory in such a contemplative mood that he caused much annoyance to several motorists who were forced to slow up considerably or else run him down.	The trees and clouds were carved in classical severity; the sounds of the countryside had harmonized to a monotone, metallic as a trumpet, breathless as the Grecian urn. The day had put Amory in such a contemplative mood that he caused much annoyance to several motorists who were forced to slow up considerably or else run him down. So engrossed in his thoughts was he that he was scarcely surprised at that strange phenomenon—cordiality manifested within fifty miles of Manhattan—when a passing car slowed down beside him and a voice hailed him.	Amory was so lost in thought that he annoyed drivers, who had to slow down a lot or risk hitting him.

“Well,” began Tom, “it seems that the idea developed simultaneously in several heads.	“For Pete’s sake, tell me more about it.” “Well,” began Tom, “it seems that the idea developed simultaneously in several heads. I was talking to Burne awhile ago, and he claims that it’s a logical result if an intelligent person thinks long enough about the social system.	"Okay," Tom started, "it looks like several people had the same idea at the same time.

Anybody that’d risk what you were in line for ought to be ineligible for Princetonian chairman.”	“ ’Cause you deserve it. Anybody that’d risk what you were in line for ought to be ineligible for Princetonian chairman.” “Oh, drop the subject,” Amory protested.	Anyone who would risk what you were trying to achieve should not be allowed to be the chairman of the Princetonian.

At five o’clock he felt the need of hearing his own voice, so he retreated to his house to see if anyone else had arrived.	By afternoon Amory realized that now the newest arrivals were taking him for an upper classman, and he tried conscientiously to look both pleasantly blasé and casually critical, which was as near as he could analyze the prevalent facial expression. At five o’clock he felt the need of hearing his own voice, so he retreated to his house to see if anyone else had arrived. Having climbed the rickety stairs he scrutinized his room resignedly, concluding that it was hopeless to attempt any more inspired decoration than class banners and tiger pictures.	At five o'clock, he wanted to hear himself talk, so he went back to his dorm to see if anyone else was there.

Browsing in her library, Amory found a tattered gray book out of which fell a yellow sheet that he impudently opened.	She had had a harried life from sixteen on, and her education had stopped sharply with her leisure. Browsing in her library, Amory found a tattered gray book out of which fell a yellow sheet that he impudently opened. It was a poem that she had written at school about a gray convent wall on a gray day, and a girl with her cloak blown by the wind sitting atop of it and thinking about the many-colored world.	While looking through her library, Amory found a worn-out gray book. A yellow piece of paper fell out, which he cheekily opened.

“Wells, I guess, and Tolstoy, and a man named Edward Carpenter.	“What chiefly started you?” “Wells, I guess, and Tolstoy, and a man named Edward Carpenter. I’ve been reading for over a year now—on a few lines, on what I consider the essential lines.”	I guess Wells, Tolstoy, and Edward Carpenter.

The phrase would be more german to the matter, if we could carry cannon by our sides: I would it might be hangers till then.	The phrase would be more german to the matter, if we could carry cannon by our sides: I would it might be hangers till then. But, on: six Barbary horses against six French swords, their assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages; that’s the French bet against the Danish.	This would be more relevant if we could carry cannons. I wish we could at least carry short swords until then.

One woe doth tread upon another’s heel, So fast they follow: your sister’s drown’d, Laertes.	One woe doth tread upon another’s heel, So fast they follow: your sister’s drown’d, Laertes.	Trouble comes one right after another, so quickly: your sister, Laertes, has drowned.

Here had we now our country's honour roof'd, Were the graced person of our Banquo present; Who may I rather challenge for unkindness Than pity for mischance!	Here had we now our country's honour roof'd, Were the graced person of our Banquo present; Who may I rather challenge for unkindness Than pity for mischance!	We would have fully honored our country here today if Banquo, our honored guest, were present. I'm more inclined to think he's being rude than that something bad has happened to him.

“Well—” “Goodbye.”	No one person in the world is necessary to you or to me.” “Well—” “Goodbye.”	“Well—” “Goodbye.”

Human beings can’t go ‘tump-tump-tump’ without going crazy.”	I guess that’s the only thing that separates horses and clocks from us. Human beings can’t go ‘tump-tump-tump’ without going crazy.” The breeze freshened and Eleanor pulled her cape around her and shivered.	People can't just do the same thing over and over without going crazy.

Burne stood vaguely for a land Amory hoped he was drifting toward—and it was almost time that land was in sight.	But that night Amory was struck by Burne’s intense earnestness, a quality he was accustomed to associate only with the dread stupidity, and by the great enthusiasm that struck dead chords in his heart. Burne stood vaguely for a land Amory hoped he was drifting toward—and it was almost time that land was in sight. Tom and Amory and Alec had reached an impasse; never did they seem to have new experiences in common, for Tom and Alec had been as blindly busy with their committees and boards as Amory had been blindly idling, and the things they had for dissection—college, contemporary personality and the like—they had hashed and rehashed for many a frugal conversational meal.	Burne represented something Amory wanted to become, and he felt like he was finally getting closer to it.

 From the scoffing superiority of sixth-form year and success Amory looked back with cynical wonder on his status of the year before.	From the scoffing superiority of sixth-form year and success Amory looked back with cynical wonder on his status of the year before. He was changed as completely as Amory Blaine could ever be changed.	From his high position in his final year, now successful and mocking, Amory looked back with disbelief at how he was the year before.

As thick as hail Came post with post; and every one did bear Thy praises in his kingdom's great defence, And pour'd them down before him.	In viewing o'er the rest o' the selfsame day, He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks, Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make, Strange images of death. As thick as hail Came post with post; and every one did bear Thy praises in his kingdom's great defence, And pour'd them down before him.	Messages arrived one right after another, as thick as hail, each one praising your heroic defense of the kingdom and showering him with those accolades.

What's the newest grief?	What's the newest grief?	What's the newest grief?

Thunder rolled with menacing crashes up the valley and scattered through the woods in intermittent batteries.	A passing storm decided to break out, and to his great impatience the sky grew black as pitch and the rain began to splatter down through the trees, become suddenly furtive and ghostly. Thunder rolled with menacing crashes up the valley and scattered through the woods in intermittent batteries. He stumbled blindly on, hunting for a way out, and finally, through webs of twisted branches, caught sight of a rift in the trees where the unbroken lightning showed open country.	Thunder boomed loudly up the valley and echoed through the woods in bursts.

“Why write books to prove he started the war—or that that stupid, overestimated Schiller is a demon in disguise?”	“What on earth is the use of suddenly running down Goethe,” he declared to Alec and Tom. “Why write books to prove he started the war—or that that stupid, overestimated Schiller is a demon in disguise?” “Have you ever read anything of theirs?” asked Tom shrewdly.	"Why write books to show he caused the war—or that that dumb, overrated Schiller is secretly evil?"

So he found Dorian Gray and the Mystic and Somber Dolores and the Belle Dame sans Merci; for a month was keen on naught else.	“Yes, I’ll go.” So he found Dorian Gray and the Mystic and Somber Dolores and the Belle Dame sans Merci; for a month was keen on naught else. The world became pale and interesting, and he tried hard to look at Princeton through the satiated eyes of Oscar Wilde and Swinburne—or “Fingal O’Flaherty” and “Algernon Charles,” as he called them in précieuse jest.	He discovered Dorian Gray, the Mystic, the gloomy Dolores, and the Belle Dame sans Merci; he was obsessed with nothing else for a month.

Moreover, amateur standing had very little value in the game they were playing, a game that would presumably be her principal study for years to come.	Isabelle and Amory were distinctly not innocent, nor were they particularly brazen. Moreover, amateur standing had very little value in the game they were playing, a game that would presumably be her principal study for years to come. She had begun as he had, with good looks and an excitable temperament, and the rest was the result of accessible popular novels and dressing-room conversation culled from a slightly older set.	Besides, being inexperienced wasn't helpful in the game they were playing, a game she would likely spend years learning.

So far as he was concerned, young Rosalind was dead.	Never again could he find even the sombre luxury of wanting her—not this Rosalind, harder, older—nor any beaten, broken woman that his imagination brought to the door of his forties—Amory had wanted her youth, the fresh radiance of her mind and body, the stuff that she was selling now once and for all. So far as he was concerned, young Rosalind was dead. A day later came a crisp, terse letter from Mr. Barton in Chicago, which informed him that as three more streetcar companies had gone into the hands of receivers he could expect for the present no further remittances.	As far as he was concerned, the young Rosalind he loved was gone.

Amory, I’m very glad we’re both alive; this war could easily have been the end of a brilliant family.	In any event, I should like to have a house in New York or Washington where you could drop in for weekends. Amory, I’m very glad we’re both alive; this war could easily have been the end of a brilliant family. But in regard to matrimony, you are now at the most dangerous period of your life.	Amory, I'm very happy we both survived; this war could have easily wiped out our family.

But, my lord, his majesty bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager on your head: sir, this is the matter—	Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry—as ’twere—I cannot tell how. But, my lord, his majesty bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager on your head: sir, this is the matter—	But my lord, the king told me to inform you that he has bet a lot of money on you. That's the situation.

The night and the scarred trees were like scenery in a play, and to be there with Eleanor, shadowy and unreal, seemed somehow oddly familiar.	Flare! The night and the scarred trees were like scenery in a play, and to be there with Eleanor, shadowy and unreal, seemed somehow oddly familiar. Amory thought how it was only the past that ever seemed strange and unbelievable.	Being there with Eleanor, who seemed shadowy and unreal, felt strangely familiar, like we were in a play with the night and the scarred trees as the backdrop.

In a sense this gradual renunciation of beauty was the second step after his disillusion had been made complete.	And in this new loneness of his that had been selected for what greatness he might achieve, beauty must be relative or, itself a harmony, it would make only a discord. In a sense this gradual renunciation of beauty was the second step after his disillusion had been made complete. He felt that he was leaving behind him his chance of being a certain type of artist.	Giving up beauty bit by bit was, in a way, the next thing he did after he lost all his illusions.

You’re all right—you’re a rubber ball, and somehow it suits you, but I’m sick of adapting myself to the local snobbishness of this corner of the world.	“No,” declared Tom emphatically, a new Tom, clothed by Brooks, shod by Franks, “I’ve won this game, but I feel as if I never want to play another. You’re all right—you’re a rubber ball, and somehow it suits you, but I’m sick of adapting myself to the local snobbishness of this corner of the world. I want to go where people aren’t barred because of the color of their neckties and the roll of their coats.”	You're fine the way you are—you bounce back from everything, and it fits you, but I'm tired of changing myself to fit in with the petty snobbery of this place.

There a few gray-haired men sat and talked quietly while the classes swept by in panorama of life.	Amory looked long at one house which bore the legend “Sixty-nine.” There a few gray-haired men sat and talked quietly while the classes swept by in panorama of life.	A few older men sat there, talking quietly, as students hurried past.

If chance will have me king, why, chance may crown me, Without my stir.	If chance will have me king, why, chance may crown me, Without my stir.	If fate wants me to be king, then fate can crown me without me having to do anything.

In ten minutes Amory was devouring cornflakes in Renwick’s, and at nine-thirty they bowled happily out of town, headed for the sands of Deal Beach.	Speed it up, kid!” In ten minutes Amory was devouring cornflakes in Renwick’s, and at nine-thirty they bowled happily out of town, headed for the sands of Deal Beach. “You see,” said Kerry, “the car belongs down there.	In ten minutes, Amory was scarfing down cornflakes at Renwick's, and by 9:30, they were driving out of town, excited to go to Deal Beach.

Ay, my lord; So you will not o’errule me to a peace.	Ay, my lord; So you will not o’errule me to a peace.	Yes, my lord; so you won't force me into a peace.

Am I not i’ the right, old Jephthah?	Am I not i’ the right, old Jephthah?	Am I not right, old Jephthah?

What he said, his attitude toward life, toward her, toward himself, were all reflexes of the dead Englishman’s literary moods.	To some extent Amory tried to play Rupert Brooke as long as he knew Eleanor. What he said, his attitude toward life, toward her, toward himself, were all reflexes of the dead Englishman’s literary moods. Often she sat in the grass, a lazy wind playing with her short hair, her voice husky as she ran up and down the scale from Grantchester to Waikiki.	His words, his outlook on life, on her, and on himself, were all just echoes of the dead Englishman's writing.

Amory did not entirely agree with Tom’s sweeping damnation of American novelists and poets.	I’ll buy you a meal on the arrogance of the last two lines.” Amory did not entirely agree with Tom’s sweeping damnation of American novelists and poets. He enjoyed both Vachel Lindsay and Booth Tarkington, and admired the conscientious, if slender, artistry of Edgar Lee Masters.	Amory didn't completely agree with Tom's harsh criticism of American novelists and poets.

Say to the king the knowledge of the broil As thou didst leave it.	Hail, brave friend! Say to the king the knowledge of the broil As thou didst leave it.	Tell the king what you know about the battle, just as you left it.

There’s probably as much corruption in zinc-made money as brass-made money.	At any rate we’ll have really knockout rooms—you can get a job on some fashion magazine, and Alec can go into the Zinc Company or whatever it is that his people own—he’s looking over my shoulder and he says it’s a brass company, but I don’t think it matters much, do you? There’s probably as much corruption in zinc-made money as brass-made money. As for the well-known Amory, he would write immortal literature if he were sure enough about anything to risk telling anyone else about it.	Money from zinc is probably just as dirty as money from brass.

This trouble pleased her, and later she made use of it as an intrinsic part of her atmosphere—especially after several astounding bracers.	From his fourth to his tenth year he did the country with his mother in her father’s private car, from Coronado, where his mother became so bored that she had a nervous breakdown in a fashionable hotel, down to Mexico City, where she took a mild, almost epidemic consumption. This trouble pleased her, and later she made use of it as an intrinsic part of her atmosphere—especially after several astounding bracers. So, while more or less fortunate little rich boys were defying governesses on the beach at Newport, or being spanked or tutored or read to from Do and Dare, or Frank on the Mississippi, Amory was biting acquiescent bellboys in the Waldorf, outgrowing a natural repugnance to chamber music and symphonies, and deriving a highly specialized education from his mother.	She enjoyed being ill and later used it to create a certain image of herself, especially after a few strong drinks.

There were three private cars; however, no one slept except in the third car, which was called the “animal car,” and where were herded the spectacled windjammers of the orchestra.	There was a proper consumption of strong waters all along the line; one man invariably went on the stage highly stimulated, claiming that his particular interpretation of the part required it. There were three private cars; however, no one slept except in the third car, which was called the “animal car,” and where were herded the spectacled windjammers of the orchestra. Everything was so hurried that there was no time to be bored, but when they arrived in Philadelphia, with vacation nearly over, there was rest in getting out of the heavy atmosphere of flowers and greasepaint, and the ponies took off their corsets with abdominal pains and sighs of relief.	They had three private train cars, but only the musicians in the orchestra, who were crammed into the third car (nicknamed the "animal car"), slept there.

“Don’t remember them all—besides my name isn’t Madeline, it’s Eleanor.”	“Answer my question, Madeline.” “Don’t remember them all—besides my name isn’t Madeline, it’s Eleanor.” “I might have guessed it.	"I don't remember all the questions—and anyway, my name isn't Madeline, it's Eleanor."

Eventually she had decided to marry for background, and the young pagan from Asheville had gone through a spiritual crisis, joined the Catholic Church, and was now—Monsignor Darcy.	When she had first returned to her country there had been a pagan, Swinburnian young man in Asheville, for whose passionate kisses and unsentimental conversations she had taken a decided penchant—they had discussed the matter pro and con with an intellectual romancing quite devoid of sappiness. Eventually she had decided to marry for background, and the young pagan from Asheville had gone through a spiritual crisis, joined the Catholic Church, and was now—Monsignor Darcy. “Indeed, Mrs. Blaine, he is still delightful company—quite the cardinal’s right-hand man.”	Eventually, she decided to marry for social standing, and the young, non-religious man from Asheville had a spiritual awakening, became Catholic, and was now Monsignor Darcy.

Yet here she is allow’d her virgin crants, Her maiden strewments and the bringing home Of bell and burial.	Her obsequies have been as far enlarged As we have warranty: her death was doubtful; And, but that great command o’ersways the order, She should in ground unsanctified have lodged Till the last trumpet; for charitable prayers, Shards, flints and pebbles should be thrown on her: Yet here she is allow’d her virgin crants, Her maiden strewments and the bringing home Of bell and burial.	But despite this, she's being given a proper burial with virgin wreaths, maiden flowers scattered on her grave, and the solemn tolling of the bell.

What art thou that usurp’st this time of night, Together with that fair and warlike form In which the majesty of buried Denmark Did sometimes march?	What art thou that usurp’st this time of night, Together with that fair and warlike form In which the majesty of buried Denmark Did sometimes march? by heaven I charge thee, speak!	Who are you, taking over this time of night, appearing in that noble and soldierly shape in which the dead king of Denmark used to march?

Amory called a greeting and descending a flight of wooden steps approached the car.	cried Alec. Amory called a greeting and descending a flight of wooden steps approached the car. He and Alec had been meeting intermittently, but the barrier of Rosalind lay always between them.	Amory greeted him and walked down some wooden steps to the car.

Ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that Which might appal the devil.	Ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that Which might appal the devil.	Yes, and a brave person, who dares to look at something that would horrify even the devil.

I possess the most valuable experience, the experience of the race, for in spite of going to college I’ve managed to pick up a good education.”	“Which may only mean that I have neither been corrupted nor made timid by contemporary experience. I possess the most valuable experience, the experience of the race, for in spite of going to college I’ve managed to pick up a good education.” “You talk glibly.”	I have the most important kind of experience: the collective wisdom of humanity. Even though I went to college, I still managed to get a real education.

Mine and my father’s death come not upon thee, Nor thine on me!	Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet: Mine and my father’s death come not upon thee, Nor thine on me! (Dies.)	Don't let my death and my father's death be your fault, and don't let your death be my fault!

(Pours the poison into the sleeper’s ears.)	Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing; Confederate season, else no creature seeing; Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected, With Hecate’s ban thrice blasted, thrice infected, Thy natural magic and dire property, On wholesome life usurp immediately. (Pours the poison into the sleeper’s ears.)	(Pours the poison into the sleeper's ears.)

“It’s going down my neck, fellow lunatic,” she offered finally.	There was a silence as they listened to the rain. “It’s going down my neck, fellow lunatic,” she offered finally. “Answer my questions.”	"It's dripping down my neck, you crazy person," she finally said.

Prithee, peace: I dare do all that may become a man; Who dares do more is none.	Prithee, peace: I dare do all that may become a man; Who dares do more is none.	Please, be quiet: I dare to do everything that is appropriate for a man; whoever dares to do more is not a man at all.

Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric; I am justly kill’d with mine own treachery.	Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric; I am justly kill’d with mine own treachery.	Well, Osric, like a woodcock caught in my own trap, I'm rightly killed by my own deceit.

The slickers of that year had adopted tortoiseshell spectacles as badges of their slickerhood, and this made them so easy to recognize that Amory and Rahill never missed one.	He dressed well, was particularly neat in appearance, and derived his name from the fact that his hair was inevitably worn short, soaked in water or tonic, parted in the middle, and slicked back as the current of fashion dictated. The slickers of that year had adopted tortoiseshell spectacles as badges of their slickerhood, and this made them so easy to recognize that Amory and Rahill never missed one. The slicker seemed distributed through school, always a little wiser and shrewder than his contemporaries, managing some team or other, and keeping his cleverness carefully concealed.	That year, the slickers wore tortoiseshell glasses as a symbol of their group, making them easily identifiable, so Amory and Rahill always spotted them.

“All—your—wonderful words Thrill me through—” The violins swelled and quavered on the last notes, the girl sank to a crumpled butterfly on the stage, a great burst of clapping filled the house.	“Oh—you—wonderful girl, What a wonderful girl you are—” sang the tenor, and Amory agreed silently, but passionately. “All—your—wonderful words Thrill me through—” The violins swelled and quavered on the last notes, the girl sank to a crumpled butterfly on the stage, a great burst of clapping filled the house. Oh, to fall in love like that, to the languorous magic melody of such a tune!	"All your wonderful words thrill me through—" The violins grew louder and trembled on the final notes, the girl collapsed gracefully on the stage, and the audience erupted in applause.

I wanted to come out here with you because I thought you were the best-looking girl in sight.	“Let’s be frank—we’ll never see each other again. I wanted to come out here with you because I thought you were the best-looking girl in sight. You really don’t care whether you ever see me again, do you?”	I wanted to come out here with you because I thought you were the most attractive girl here.

To-morrow, as he purposes.	To-morrow, as he purposes.	Tomorrow, as he plans.

With the instinct of a child Amory edged in under the blue darkness of the white buildings, cleaving the moonlight for haggard seconds, once bursting into a slow run with clumsy stumblings.	Amory’s shadow lay, perhaps, ten feet ahead of him, and soft shoes was presumably that far behind. With the instinct of a child Amory edged in under the blue darkness of the white buildings, cleaving the moonlight for haggard seconds, once bursting into a slow run with clumsy stumblings. After that he stopped suddenly; he must keep hold, he thought.	Like a child, Amory slipped into the shadows of the buildings, briefly cutting through the moonlight, and then suddenly ran awkwardly.

He awoke laughing and his eyes lazily roamed his surroundings, evidently a bedroom and bath in a good hotel.	He awoke laughing and his eyes lazily roamed his surroundings, evidently a bedroom and bath in a good hotel. His head was whirring and picture after picture was forming and blurring and melting before his eyes, but beyond the desire to laugh he had no entirely conscious reaction.	He woke up laughing, his eyes slowly looking around at what was clearly a nice hotel bedroom and bathroom.

They dressed and ate breakfast in silence, and then sauntered out to get some air.	Sloane was snoring heavily, his clothes in a pile by his bed. They dressed and ate breakfast in silence, and then sauntered out to get some air. Amory’s mind was working slowly, trying to assimilate what had happened and separate from the chaotic imagery that stacked his memory the bare shreds of truth.	They got dressed, ate breakfast quietly, and then strolled out for some fresh air.

“And you’re holding my hand, which is dangerous without seeing my face.”	he exclaimed. “And you’re holding my hand, which is dangerous without seeing my face.” He dropped it quickly.	"And you're holding my hand, which is risky if you can't see my face."

It was a day easily associated with those abstract truths and purities that dissolve in the sunshine or fade out in mocking laughter by the light of the moon.	It was a gray day, that least fleshly of all weathers; a day of dreams and far hopes and clear visions. It was a day easily associated with those abstract truths and purities that dissolve in the sunshine or fade out in mocking laughter by the light of the moon. The trees and clouds were carved in classical severity; the sounds of the countryside had harmonized to a monotone, metallic as a trumpet, breathless as the Grecian urn.	It was a day that made you think of pure, abstract ideas that disappear when things are clear and bright or when reality mocks them.

From Fife, great king; Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky And fan our people cold.	From Fife, great king; Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky And fan our people cold. Norway himself, With terrible numbers, Assisted by that most disloyal traitor The thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict; Till that Bellona's bridegroom, lapp'd in proof, Confronted him with self-comparisons, Point against point rebellious, arm 'gainst arm.	From Fife, great king, where the Norwegian flags wave mockingly in the sky and chill our people.

“Victorians, Victorians, who never learned to weep Who sowed the bitter harvest that your children go to reap—” scribbled Amory in his notebook.	So he sat one day in an English lecture and heard “Locksley Hall” quoted and fell into a brown study with contempt for Tennyson and all he stood for—for he took him as a representative of the Victorians. “Victorians, Victorians, who never learned to weep Who sowed the bitter harvest that your children go to reap—” scribbled Amory in his notebook. The lecturer was saying something about Tennyson’s solidity and fifty heads were bent to take notes.	"Victorians, Victorians, you never learned to feel real sorrow. You planted the seeds of pain that your children will suffer from," Amory scribbled in his notebook.

Tom and Amory, bound in the morning for different training-camps, paced the shadowy walks as usual and seemed still to see around them the faces of the men they knew.	Then the night came that was to be the last. Tom and Amory, bound in the morning for different training-camps, paced the shadowy walks as usual and seemed still to see around them the faces of the men they knew. “The grass is full of ghosts tonight.”	Tom and Amory, who were leaving for different training camps in the morning, walked the dark paths like they always did and imagined they could still see the faces of their friends around them.

Phyllis’s feelings as she was paraded by the Harvard and Princeton stands, where sat dozens of her former devotees, can be imagined.	She was vociferously greeted and escorted enthusiastically across the campus, followed by half a hundred village urchins—to the stifled laughter of hundreds of alumni and visitors, half of whom had no idea that this was a practical joke, but thought that Burne and Fred were two varsity sports showing their girl a collegiate time. Phyllis’s feelings as she was paraded by the Harvard and Princeton stands, where sat dozens of her former devotees, can be imagined. She tried to walk a little ahead, she tried to walk a little behind—but they stayed close, that there should be no doubt whom she was with, talking in loud voices of their friends on the football team, until she could almost hear her acquaintances whispering: “Phyllis Styles must be awfully hard up to have to come with those two.”	You can only imagine how Phyllis felt being shown off in front of the Harvard and Princeton stands, where many of her old admirers were sitting.

They say Bernard Shaw, in spite of his doctrines, is the most exacting of all dramatists about his royalties.	“You puzzle me,” said the big man, “but you’re all alike. They say Bernard Shaw, in spite of his doctrines, is the most exacting of all dramatists about his royalties. To the last farthing.”	People say Bernard Shaw, even though he preached certain beliefs, was the most demanding playwright when it came to getting paid his royalties.

a puzzled, furtive interest in everything concerning sex.	an unholy selfishness. a puzzled, furtive interest in everything concerning sex. There was, also, a curious strain of weakness running crosswise through his makeup.	A confused and secretive interest in sex.

And, for that purpose, I’ll anoint my sword.	I will do’t: And, for that purpose, I’ll anoint my sword.	And for that reason, I'll grease my sword.

In every store where she had ever traded she was whispered about as the beautiful Mrs. Page.	Shopping with her was a rare, epicurean dream. In every store where she had ever traded she was whispered about as the beautiful Mrs. Page. “I’ll bet she won’t stay single long.”	People whispered about her as the beautiful Mrs. Page in every store where she had shopped.

“Kids—child’s play!” scoffed his antagonist.	If you’d gone to college you’d have been struck by the fact that the men there would work twice as hard for any one of a hundred petty honors as those other men did who were earning their way through.” “Kids—child’s play!” scoffed his antagonist. “Not by a darned sight—unless we’re all children.	"That's just kids stuff—easy!" his opponent scoffed.

They were the Blaines of Lake Geneva; they had quite enough relatives to serve in place of friends, and an enviable standing from Pasadena to Cape Cod.	The Blaines were attached to no city. They were the Blaines of Lake Geneva; they had quite enough relatives to serve in place of friends, and an enviable standing from Pasadena to Cape Cod. But Beatrice grew more and more prone to like only new acquaintances, as there were certain stories, such as the history of her constitution and its many amendments, memories of her years abroad, that it was necessary for her to repeat at regular intervals.	They were the Blaines from Lake Geneva, with plenty of relatives who acted as friends, and a respected reputation from Pasadena to Cape Cod.

“Oh, Dick Humbird and Kerry Holiday and Jesse Ferrenby	he demanded as he wriggled into his B.V.D.s. “Oh, Dick Humbird and Kerry Holiday and Jesse Ferrenby and	"Oh, Dick Humbird, Kerry Holiday, and Jesse Ferrenby..."

This same skull, sir, was Yorick’s skull, the king’s jester.	This same skull, sir, was Yorick’s skull, the king’s jester.	This very skull, sir, belonged to Yorick, the king's jester.

Touching this vision here, It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you: For your desire to know what is between us, O’ermaster’t as you may.	Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio, And much offence too. Touching this vision here, It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you: For your desire to know what is between us, O’ermaster’t as you may. And now, good friends, As you are friends, scholars and soldiers, Give me one poor request.	About this ghost, let me tell you, it's a truthful one. As for your desire to know what's between us, try to suppress it.

You, worthy uncle, Shall, with my cousin, your right-noble son, Lead our first battle: worthy Macduff and we Shall take upon 's what else remains to do, According to our order.	And show like those you are. You, worthy uncle, Shall, with my cousin, your right-noble son, Lead our first battle: worthy Macduff and we Shall take upon 's what else remains to do, According to our order.	You, my good uncle, will lead the first battle along with your noble son, my cousin. Worthy Macduff and I will take care of whatever else needs to be done, following our plan.

I would not have such a heart in my bosom for the dignity of the whole body.	I would not have such a heart in my bosom for the dignity of the whole body.	I wouldn't carry such a heart, even to protect my entire body.

Come to my woman's breasts, And take my milk for gall, you murdering ministers, Wherever in your sightless substances You wait on nature's mischief!	make thick my blood; Stop up the access and passage to remorse, That no compunctious visitings of nature Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between The effect and it! Come to my woman's breasts, And take my milk for gall, you murdering ministers, Wherever in your sightless substances You wait on nature's mischief! Come, thick night, And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell, That my keen knife see not the wound it makes, Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark, To cry 'Hold, hold!'	Come, evil spirits, take away my nurturing nature and replace it with bitterness. You who are unseen but serve evil, come help me!

Indeed, he had had no definite reason for coming to the coast.	Amory avoided the question. Indeed, he had had no definite reason for coming to the coast. “Do you remember that party of ours, sophomore year?”	He really didn't have a specific reason for coming to the coast.

All tragedy has that strain of the grotesque and squalid—so useless, futile.	All that remained of the charm and personality of the Dick Humbird he had known—oh, it was all so horrible and unaristocratic and close to the earth. All tragedy has that strain of the grotesque and squalid—so useless, futile. the way animals die.	Tragedy always has elements of the bizarre and wretched—so pointless, hopeless.

 Two mornings later he knocked at the president’s door at Bascome and Barlow’s advertising agency.	Two mornings later he knocked at the president’s door at Bascome and Barlow’s advertising agency. “Come in!”	Two mornings later, he knocked on the president's door at the Bascome and Barlow advertising agency.

The invitation to Miss Myra St. Claire’s bobbing party spent the morning in his coat pocket, where it had an intense physical affair with a dusty piece of peanut brittle.	His chief disadvantage lay in athletics, but as soon as he discovered that it was the touchstone of power and popularity at school, he began to make furious, persistent efforts to excel in the winter sports, and with his ankles aching and bending in spite of his efforts, he skated valiantly around the Lorelie rink every afternoon, wondering how soon he would be able to carry a hockey-stick without getting it inexplicably tangled in his skates. The invitation to Miss Myra St. Claire’s bobbing party spent the morning in his coat pocket, where it had an intense physical affair with a dusty piece of peanut brittle. During the afternoon he brought it to light with a sigh, and after some consideration and a preliminary draft in the back of Collar and Daniel’s First-Year Latin, composed an answer: My dear Miss St. Claire: Your truly charming envitation for the evening of next Thursday evening was truly delightful to receive this morning.	The invitation to Myra St. Claire's bobbing party sat in his coat pocket all morning, rubbing against a dusty piece of peanut brittle.

For better or worse we’ve stamped you; you’re a Princeton type!”	“You can’t, Tom,” argued Amory, as they rolled along through the scattering night; “wherever you go now you’ll always unconsciously apply these standards of ‘having it’ or ‘lacking it.’ For better or worse we’ve stamped you; you’re a Princeton type!” “Well, then,” complained Tom, his cracked voice rising plaintively, “why do I have to come back at all?	Whether it's good or bad, we've marked you; you're a Princeton kind of guy!

When Amory had the whooping-cough four disgusted specialists glared at each other hunched around his bed; when he took scarlet fever the number of attendants, including physicians and nurses, totalled fourteen.	These domestic pilgrimages were invariably in state; two maids, the private car, or Mr. Blaine when available, and very often a physician. When Amory had the whooping-cough four disgusted specialists glared at each other hunched around his bed; when he took scarlet fever the number of attendants, including physicians and nurses, totalled fourteen. However, blood being thicker than broth, he was pulled through.	When Amory had whooping cough, four annoyed specialists huddled around his bed, glaring at each other; when he got scarlet fever, a total of fourteen people, including doctors and nurses, were taking care of him.

Never to speak of this that you have seen, Swear by my sword.	Never to speak of this that you have seen, Swear by my sword.	Don't ever talk about what you've seen. Swear on my sword.

So, thanks to all at once and to each one, Whom we invite to see us crown'd at Scone.	What's more to do, Which would be planted newly with the time, As calling home our exiled friends abroad That fled the snares of watchful tyranny; Producing forth the cruel ministers Of this dead butcher and his fiend-like queen, Who, as 'tis thought, by self and violent hands Took off her life; this, and what needful else That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace, We will perform in measure, time and place: So, thanks to all at once and to each one, Whom we invite to see us crown'd at Scone.	So, thanks to everyone, and we invite you to see us crowned at Scone.

“It’s gone now,” came Tom’s voice after a second in a still terror.	He saw nothing but the dark windowpane. “It’s gone now,” came Tom’s voice after a second in a still terror. “Something was looking at you.”	"It's gone now," Tom said, his voice still shaking with fear.

Are we going to surely catch up with ’em before they get there?”	I was just yawning. Are we going to surely catch up with ’em before they get there?” He was encouraging a faint hope that they might slip into the Minnehaha Club and meet the others there, be found in blasé seclusion before the fire and quite regain his lost attitude.	Are we going to catch them before they arrive?

A worthy pioner!	Well said, old mole! canst work i’ the earth so fast? A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.	A good worker!

Dimly he promised himself a time where all should be welded together.	It was all like a banquet where he sat for this half-hour of his youth and tried to enjoy brilliant epicurean courses. Dimly he promised himself a time where all should be welded together. For months it seemed that he had alternated between being borne along a stream of love or fascination, or left in an eddy, and in the eddies he had not desired to think, rather to be picked up on a wave’s top and swept along again.	He vaguely hoped for a future where everything would come together.

A whole one, I. For thou dost know, O Damon dear, This realm dismantled was Of Jove himself; and now reigns here A very, very—pajock.	A whole one, I. For thou dost know, O Damon dear, This realm dismantled was Of Jove himself; and now reigns here A very, very—pajock.	I agree completely. You know, dear Damon, Jove himself was overthrown in this kingdom, and now a mere peacock reigns here.

Mother always feels the girl is safe if she’s with me.	“That’s just it. Mother always feels the girl is safe if she’s with me. Honestly, it’s annoying.	Mother always feels the girl is safe if she's with me.

So they proceeded with an infinite guile that would have horrified her parents.	He was aware that he was getting this particular favor now because she had been coached; he knew that he stood for merely the best game in sight, and that he would have to improve his opportunity before he lost his advantage. So they proceeded with an infinite guile that would have horrified her parents. After the dinner the dance began.	They continued with a level of deception that would have shocked her parents.

If it be mine, Keep it not from me, quickly let me have it.	If it be mine, Keep it not from me, quickly let me have it.	If it's mine, don't keep it from me, give it to me quickly.

“You can get one of those taxis and beat it,” said Olson, pointing to the blurred outline of two machines whose drivers were presumably asleep inside.	Then the chill outdoors—where the salt air was fresher and keener still with the first hints of morning. “You can get one of those taxis and beat it,” said Olson, pointing to the blurred outline of two machines whose drivers were presumably asleep inside. “Goodbye,” said Olson.	"You can grab one of those taxis and take off," said Olson, pointing to the blurry shapes of two cars, with their drivers probably asleep inside.

Your servants ever Have theirs, themselves and what is theirs, in compt, To make their audit at your highness' pleasure, Still to return your own.	Your servants ever Have theirs, themselves and what is theirs, in compt, To make their audit at your highness' pleasure, Still to return your own.	Your servants always consider that they, everything they are, and everything they own, is held in account, to be reviewed whenever you wish, and to be returned to you.

I often think over what you said on that night and wonder how much you meant.	It’ll be fine, I think, and I want to bring you just at the end of a wonderful year. I often think over what you said on that night and wonder how much you meant. If it were anyone but you—but you see I thought you were fickle the first time I saw you and you are so popular and everthing that I can’t imagine you really liking me best.	I often think about what you said that night and wonder how serious you were.

Horatio, thou art e’en as just a man As e’er my conversation coped withal.	Horatio, thou art e’en as just a man As e’er my conversation coped withal.	Horatio, you are as fair a man as I have ever met.

“No, I’m thinking about myself—my black old inside self, the real one, with the fundamental honesty that keeps me from being absolutely wicked by making me realize my own sins.”	“Are you very cold?” asked Amory. “No, I’m thinking about myself—my black old inside self, the real one, with the fundamental honesty that keeps me from being absolutely wicked by making me realize my own sins.” They were riding up close by the cliff and Amory gazed over.	"No, I'm thinking about my true self—my dark, inner self, the real me, with the basic honesty that stops me from being completely bad by making me aware of my own faults."

He moved his bed so that the sun would wake him at dawn that he might dress and go out to the archaic swing that hung from an apple-tree near the sixth-form house.	In the spring he read L’Allegro, by request, and was inspired to lyrical outpourings on the subject of Arcady and the pipes of Pan. He moved his bed so that the sun would wake him at dawn that he might dress and go out to the archaic swing that hung from an apple-tree near the sixth-form house. Seating himself in this he would pump higher and higher until he got the effect of swinging into the wide air, into a fairyland of piping satyrs and nymphs with the faces of fair-haired girls he passed in the streets of Eastchester.	He moved his bed so the sun would wake him up early, so he could get dressed and go to the old-fashioned swing hanging from an apple tree near the senior dorm.

Amory wandered occasionally to New York on the chance of finding a new shining green autobus, that its stick-of-candy glamour might penetrate his disposition.	The weeks tore by. Amory wandered occasionally to New York on the chance of finding a new shining green autobus, that its stick-of-candy glamour might penetrate his disposition. One day he ventured into a stock-company revival of a play whose name was faintly familiar.	Amory sometimes went to New York hoping to find a bright, new green bus, thinking its appealing charm might lift his spirits.

He was proud of the fact that he could never become a mechanical or scientific genius.	He did not consider himself a “strong char’c’ter,” but relied on his facility (learn things sorta quick) and his superior mentality (read a lotta deep books). He was proud of the fact that he could never become a mechanical or scientific genius. From no other heights was he debarred.	He was proud that he could never be a genius in mechanics or science.

The man in the street heard the conclusions of dead genius through someone else’s clever paradoxes and didactic epigrams.	Yet all thought usually reached the public after thirty years in some such form: Benson and Chesterton had popularized Huysmans and Newman; Shaw had sugarcoated Nietzsche and Ibsen and Schopenhauer. The man in the street heard the conclusions of dead genius through someone else’s clever paradoxes and didactic epigrams. Life was a damned muddle.	Ordinary people learned about the ideas of brilliant thinkers long after they died, through the witty and preachy sayings of others.

Ay, marry, is’t; crowner’s quest law.	Ay, marry, is’t; crowner’s quest law.	Yes, indeed; it's coroner's inquest law.

In what particular thought to work I know not; But in the gross and scope of my opinion, This bodes some strange eruption to our state.	In what particular thought to work I know not; But in the gross and scope of my opinion, This bodes some strange eruption to our state.	I don't know what specific action to take, but in my general opinion, this suggests some kind of major upheaval is coming for our country.

Anything which brought an under classman into too glaring a light was labelled with the damning brand of “running it out.”	The upper-class clubs, concerning which he had pumped a reluctant graduate during the previous summer, excited his curiosity: Ivy, detached and breathlessly aristocratic; Cottage, an impressive mélange of brilliant adventurers and well-dressed philanderers; Tiger Inn, broad-shouldered and athletic, vitalized by an honest elaboration of prep-school standards; Cap and Gown, anti-alcoholic, faintly religious and politically powerful; flamboyant Colonial; literary Quadrangle; and the dozen others, varying in age and position. Anything which brought an under classman into too glaring a light was labelled with the damning brand of “running it out.” The movies thrived on caustic comments, but the men who made them were generally running it out; talking of clubs was running it out; standing for anything very strongly, as, for instance, drinking parties or teetotalling, was running it out; in short, being personally conspicuous was not tolerated, and the influential man was the noncommittal man, until at club elections in sophomore year everyone should be sewed up in some bag for the rest of his college career.	If a freshman or sophomore did anything to draw too much attention to themselves, it was criticized and called "running it out."

His head was whirring and picture after picture was forming and blurring and melting before his eyes, but beyond the desire to laugh he had no entirely conscious reaction.	He awoke laughing and his eyes lazily roamed his surroundings, evidently a bedroom and bath in a good hotel. His head was whirring and picture after picture was forming and blurring and melting before his eyes, but beyond the desire to laugh he had no entirely conscious reaction. He reached for the phone beside his bed.	His head was spinning, and images flashed in his mind, blurring and fading, but all he felt was the urge to laugh; he couldn't think clearly about anything else.

But come; Here, as before, never, so help you mercy, How strange or odd soe’er	There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come; Here, as before, never, so help you mercy, How strange or odd soe’er I bear myself, As I perchance hereafter shall think meet To put an antic disposition on, That you, at such times seeing me, never shall, With arms encumber’d thus, or this headshake, Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase, As “Well, well, we know,” or “We could, an if we would,” Or “If we list to speak,” or “There be, an if they might,” Or such ambiguous giving out, to note That you know aught of me: this not to do, So grace and mercy at your most need help you, Swear.	But come, as before, swear you'll never, so help you God, no matter how strange or odd

He differed from the healthy type that was essentially middle class—he never seemed to perspire.	Amory decided that he probably held the world back, but he wouldn’t have changed him. He differed from the healthy type that was essentially middle class—he never seemed to perspire. Some people couldn’t be familiar with a chauffeur without having it returned; Humbird could have lunched at Sherry’s with a colored man, yet people would have somehow known that it was all right.	He was different from the typical, healthy, middle-class person—he never seemed to sweat.

He hemmed several times and looked consciously kind, as a man will when he knows he’s on delicate ground.	His summoner received him gravely, and motioned him to a chair. He hemmed several times and looked consciously kind, as a man will when he knows he’s on delicate ground. “Amory,” he began.	He cleared his throat a few times and tried to look like he cared, like someone does when they know they're talking about something sensitive.

Next he was sleepy, and he had a hazy, listless sense of people in dress suits, probably waiters, gathering around the table.	Then Rosalind began popping into his mind again, and he found his lips forming her name over and over. Next he was sleepy, and he had a hazy, listless sense of people in dress suits, probably waiters, gathering around the table. He was in a room and Carling was saying something about a knot in his shoelace.	Next, he felt sleepy and vaguely noticed people in suits, probably waiters, standing around the table.

I will not be afraid of death and bane, Till Birnam forest come to Dunsinane.	Bring it after me. I will not be afraid of death and bane, Till Birnam forest come to Dunsinane.	I won't be afraid of death or destruction until Birnam Wood moves to Dunsinane.

At least we'll die with harness on our back.	come, wrack! At least we'll die with harness on our back.	At least we'll die fighting.

Your castle is surprised; your wife and babes Savagely slaughter'd: to relate the manner, Were, on the quarry of these murder'd deer, To add the death of you.	Your castle is surprised; your wife and babes Savagely slaughter'd: to relate the manner, Were, on the quarry of these murder'd deer, To add the death of you.	Your castle has been attacked; your wife and children brutally murdered. To describe how it happened would only cause you more pain, like adding another death to those already slain.

“They shuddered when they found what Mr. Darwin was about, They shuddered when the waltz came in and Newman hurried out—” But the waltz came in much earlier; he crossed that out.	Amory turned over to a fresh page and began scrawling again. “They shuddered when they found what Mr. Darwin was about, They shuddered when the waltz came in and Newman hurried out—” But the waltz came in much earlier; he crossed that out. “And entitled ‘A Song in the Time of Order,’ ” came the professor’s voice, droning far away.	"People were shocked by Darwin's theories, shocked when the waltz became popular and Newman left the church-" But the waltz was popular before that, so he crossed it out.

Los’ idealism, got be physcal anmal,” he shook his fist expressively at Old King Cole, “got be Prussian ’bout ev’thing, women ’specially.	“Two years my life spent inalleshual vacuity. Los’ idealism, got be physcal anmal,” he shook his fist expressively at Old King Cole, “got be Prussian ’bout ev’thing, women ’specially. Use’ be straight ’bout women college.	Los's idealism needs to be more physical and animalistic. He has to be strict about everything, especially women.

This diamond he greets your wife withal, By the name of most kind hostess; and shut up In measureless content.	The king's a-bed: He hath been in unusual pleasure, and Sent forth great largess to your offices. This diamond he greets your wife withal, By the name of most kind hostess; and shut up In measureless content.	He sends your wife this diamond, calling her a most kind hostess, and is completely satisfied.

It is backed like a weasel.	It is backed like a weasel.	It is backed like a weasel.

A calm virility and a dreamy humor, marked contrasts to her level-headedness—into these moods she slipped sometimes as a refuge.	Instead, Amory would have thought from his reception that she had not a care in the world. A calm virility and a dreamy humor, marked contrasts to her level-headedness—into these moods she slipped sometimes as a refuge. She could do the most prosy things (though she was wise enough never to stultify herself with such “household arts” as knitting and embroidery), yet immediately afterward pick up a book and let her imagination rove as a formless cloud with the wind.	She sometimes escaped into calm strength and whimsical humor, which were very different from her usual practicality.

Than is his father's, must embrace the fate Of that dark hour.	Within this hour at most I will advise you where to plant yourselves; Acquaint you with the perfect spy o' the time, The moment on't; for't must be done to-night, And something from the palace; always thought That I require a clearness: and with him— To leave no rubs nor botches in the work— Fleance his son, that keeps him company, Whose absence is no less material to me Than is his father's, must embrace the fate Of that dark hour. Resolve yourselves apart: I'll come to you anon.	Must meet the same death as his father tonight.

Amory, his head spinning gorgeously, layer upon layer of soft satisfaction setting over the bruised spots of his spirit, was discoursing volubly on the war.	At ten o’clock Wilson was displaced by Carling, class of ’15. Amory, his head spinning gorgeously, layer upon layer of soft satisfaction setting over the bruised spots of his spirit, was discoursing volubly on the war. “ ’S a mental was’e,” he insisted with owl-like wisdom.	Amory, feeling fantastic and blissfully content, was talking at length about the war, which was healing his emotional wounds.

Take thy fair hour, Laertes; time be thine, And thy best graces spend it at thy will!	Take thy fair hour, Laertes; time be thine, And thy best graces spend it at thy will! But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son—	Enjoy your time, Laertes; it's yours to use as you wish!

So he took Axia’s arm and, piling intimately into a taxicab, they drove out over the hundreds and drew up at a tall, white-stone apartment-house.	In fact, it would be, perhaps, the thing to do in order to keep an eye on Sloane, who was not in a state to do his own thinking. So he took Axia’s arm and, piling intimately into a taxicab, they drove out over the hundreds and drew up at a tall, white-stone apartment-house. Never would he forget that street.	He took Axia's arm, and they squeezed into a taxi together. They drove a long way and arrived at a tall apartment building made of white stone.

“Didn’t you ever hear of the Mann Act?	The burly man regarded Amory contemptuously. “Didn’t you ever hear of the Mann Act? Coming down here with her,” he indicated the girl with his thumb, “with a New York license on your car—to a hotel like this.”	"Haven't you ever heard of the Mann Act?"

With greatest affection, Thayer Darcy.	I feel annoyingly out of date on you. With greatest affection, Thayer Darcy. Within a week after the receipt of this letter their little household fell precipitously to pieces.	Love, Thayer Darcy.

Young fry of treachery!	What, you egg! Young fry of treachery!	Young, treacherous brat!

Isabelle’s face was a study in enraptured curiosity.	“Oh—what?” Isabelle’s face was a study in enraptured curiosity. Amory shook his head.	Isabelle looked completely fascinated and curious.

Your royal father 's murder'd.	Your royal father 's murder'd.	Your royal father was murdered.

He had a sense of reality such as material things could never give him.	During all this time it never occurred to him that he was delirious or drunk. He had a sense of reality such as material things could never give him. His intellectual content seemed to submit passively to it, and it fitted like a glove everything that had ever preceded it in his life.	He felt a sense of reality that money or possessions could never provide.

Thirty-five dollars a week—less than a good carpenter.”	“And I think I was rottenly underpaid. Thirty-five dollars a week—less than a good carpenter.” “You had just started.	Thirty-five dollars a week—that's less than a good carpenter makes.

This orgy of sociability culminated in a gigantic party at the Nassau Inn, where punch was dispensed from immense bowls, and the whole downstairs became a delirious, circulating, shouting pattern of faces and voices.	In his own crowd Amory saw men kept out for wearing green hats, for being “a damn tailor’s dummy,” for having “too much pull in heaven,” for getting drunk one night “not like a gentleman, by God,” or for unfathomable secret reasons known to no one but the wielders of the black balls. This orgy of sociability culminated in a gigantic party at the Nassau Inn, where punch was dispensed from immense bowls, and the whole downstairs became a delirious, circulating, shouting pattern of faces and voices. “Hi, Dibby—’gratulations!”	This wild social gathering ended with a huge party at the Nassau Inn, where punch flowed from massive bowls, and the entire downstairs area turned into a crazy, moving, yelling mix of people.

“Yes,” said Axia, coming in, “and Amory.	“Amory, pour ’em out,” she said, “and we’ll drink to Fred Sloane, who has a rare, distinguished edge.” “Yes,” said Axia, coming in, “and Amory. I like Amory.”	"Yes," said Axia, coming in, "and Amory.

Somehow he could find nothing hopeless in having lived.	He wondered that graves ever made people consider life in vain. Somehow he could find nothing hopeless in having lived. All the broken columns and clasped hands and doves and angels meant romances.	He didn't see anything pointless in having lived.

“Oh, he’s having a frightful time.”	“Did he think I’d plunged into Bolshevism?” asked Amory, interested. “Oh, he’s having a frightful time.” “Why?”	"Oh, he's having a terrible time."

Pour in sow's blood, that hath eaten Her nine farrow; grease that's sweaten From the murderer's gibbet throw Into the flame.	Pour in sow's blood, that hath eaten Her nine farrow; grease that's sweaten From the murderer's gibbet throw Into the flame. Come, high or low; Thyself and office deftly show!	Pour in pig's blood from a sow that ate her nine piglets; throw grease dripping from a murderer's gallows into the fire.

This grave shall have a living monument: An hour of quiet shortly shall we see; Till then, in patience our proceeding be.	This grave shall have a living monument: An hour of quiet shortly shall we see; Till then, in patience our proceeding be. (Exeunt.)	This grave will have a lasting memory: We'll have a peaceful moment soon; Until then, let's be patient.

Shopping with her was a rare, epicurean dream.	How he loved to do any sort of thing with Clara! Shopping with her was a rare, epicurean dream. In every store where she had ever traded she was whispered about as the beautiful Mrs. Page.	Shopping with her was a delightful and luxurious experience.

Shaw’s aloof clarity and brilliant consistency and the gloriously intoxicated efforts of H. G. Wells to fit the key of romantic symmetry into the elusive lock of truth, alone won his rapt attention.	Mackenzie, Chesterton, Galsworthy, Bennett, had sunk in his appreciation from sagacious, life-saturated geniuses to merely diverting contemporaries. Shaw’s aloof clarity and brilliant consistency and the gloriously intoxicated efforts of H. G. Wells to fit the key of romantic symmetry into the elusive lock of truth, alone won his rapt attention. He wanted to see Monsignor Darcy, to whom he had written when he landed, but he had not heard from him; besides he knew that a visit to Monsignor would entail the story of Rosalind, and the thought of repeating it turned him cold with horror.	Only Shaw's clear, consistent thinking and H.G. Wells' passionate attempts to find a beautiful, perfect explanation for the mysteries of truth really interested him.

None of the Victorian mothers—and most of the mothers were Victorian—had any idea how casually their daughters were accustomed to be kissed.	On the Triangle trip Amory had come into constant contact with that great current American phenomenon, the “petting party.” None of the Victorian mothers—and most of the mothers were Victorian—had any idea how casually their daughters were accustomed to be kissed. “Servant-girls are that way,” says Mrs. Huston-Carmelite to her popular daughter.	The Victorian mothers, and most of them were, had no idea how easily their daughters were being kissed.

Why, one that swears and lies.	Why, one that swears and lies.	Someone who curses and lies.

“I’ve just come from school—St. Regis’s, you know.”	Take a big chair and we’ll have a chat.” “I’ve just come from school—St. Regis’s, you know.” “So your mother says—a remarkable woman; have a cigarette—I’m sure you smoke.	"I just got here from school—you know, St. Regis's."

Isabelle’s face was a study in enraptured curiosity.	“Oh—what?” Isabelle’s face was a study in enraptured curiosity. Amory shook his head.	Isabelle looked completely fascinated and curious.

Then the insistent voice of the old crone in a sort of croaking triumph: “He’s quite dead, all right.	“Feel his heart!” Then the insistent voice of the old crone in a sort of croaking triumph: “He’s quite dead, all right. The car turned over.	Then the old woman's insistent voice, sounding like a triumphant croak, said: "He's definitely dead.

Then Amory opened his eyes, half afraid that sight would spoil the rich illusion of harmony.	The song soared so high that all dropped out except the tenors, who bore the melody triumphantly past the danger-point and relinquished it to the fantastic chorus. Then Amory opened his eyes, half afraid that sight would spoil the rich illusion of harmony. He sighed eagerly.	Amory opened his eyes, worried that seeing would ruin the beautiful music.

and 'Amen' the other; As they had seen me with these hangman's hands.	One cried 'God bless us!' and 'Amen' the other; As they had seen me with these hangman's hands. Listening their fear, I could not say 'Amen,' When they did say 'God bless us!'	and the other person said 'Amen,' because they saw my hands, which had been used to execute someone.

but as pictures: 'tis the eye of childhood That fears a painted devil.	Give me the daggers: the sleeping and the dead Are but as pictures: 'tis the eye of childhood That fears a painted devil. If he do bleed, I'll gild the faces of the grooms withal; For it must seem their guilt.	like paintings; only children are afraid of a painted devil.

To the selfsame tune and words.	To the selfsame tune and words. Who's here?	To the same song and lyrics.

Myra pictured an all-night tobacco debauch, with Amory pale and reeling from the effect of nicotined lungs.	I’ve got t’bacca heart.” Myra pictured an all-night tobacco debauch, with Amory pale and reeling from the effect of nicotined lungs. She gave a little gasp.	Myra imagined Amory spending all night in a wild tobacco binge, picturing him pale and staggering from too much nicotine.

Amory sprawled on a couch.	How went the advertising business today?” Amory sprawled on a couch. “I loathed it as usual!”	Amory relaxed on a couch.

Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat In this distracted globe.	Remember thee! Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat In this distracted globe. Remember thee!	Yes, you poor ghost, as long as I can remember anything in this troubled mind.

I’ll do’t.	eat a crocodile? I’ll do’t.	I'll do it.

I think that comes in our programme about five o’clock.”	By the way, we’re going to ride up Harper’s Hill. I think that comes in our programme about five o’clock.” “You little devil,” Amory growled.	I think that's scheduled for around five o'clock."

“What are you,” asked the big man, “one of these parlor Bolsheviks, one of these idealists?	Amory laughed. “What are you,” asked the big man, “one of these parlor Bolsheviks, one of these idealists? I must say I fail to see the difference.	"What are you," the big man asked, "one of those armchair revolutionaries, one of those dreamers?"

Faint winds, and far away a fading laughter.”	serene. Faint winds, and far away a fading laughter.”	Faint winds, and a distant laughter fades away.

Sudden revulsion seized Amory, disgust, loathing for the whole incident.	She slipped her hand into his, her head drooped against his shoulder. Sudden revulsion seized Amory, disgust, loathing for the whole incident. He desired frantically to be away, never to see Myra again, never to kiss anyone; he became conscious of his face and hers, of their clinging hands, and he wanted to creep out of his body and hide somewhere safe out of sight, up in the corner of his mind.	Amory was suddenly disgusted, hating the whole thing.

They told him in all earnestness that he had a mind like Shelley’s, and featured his ultrafree free verse and prose poetry in the Nassau Literary Magazine.	At least so Tom and Amory took him. They told him in all earnestness that he had a mind like Shelley’s, and featured his ultrafree free verse and prose poetry in the Nassau Literary Magazine. But Tanaduke’s genius absorbed the many colors of the age, and he took to the Bohemian life, to their great disappointment.	They seriously told him he was as brilliant as Shelley and published his experimental poetry in the Nassau Literary Magazine.

There was something fascinating about Myra, shut away here cosily from the dim, chill air.	A silence, while Amory thrilled. There was something fascinating about Myra, shut away here cosily from the dim, chill air. Myra, a little bundle of clothes, with strands of yellow hair curling out from under her skating cap.	Myra was fascinating, all snug and warm inside, away from the cold and gloom.

Afterward they suppered on ginger ale and devil’s food in the pantry, and Amory announced a decision.	At any rate, Amory watched the night that should have been the consummation of romance glide by with great moths overhead and the heavy fragrance of roadside gardens, but without those broken words, those little sighs. Afterward they suppered on ginger ale and devil’s food in the pantry, and Amory announced a decision. “I’m leaving early in the morning.”	Afterward, they had a light meal of ginger ale and devil's food cake in the pantry, and Amory announced a decision.

“It just seemed an easy way out of everything—when I think of another useless, draggy year.”	“I’m afraid you do,” agreed Amory reluctantly. “It just seemed an easy way out of everything—when I think of another useless, draggy year.” “Yes, I know; but to tell you the truth, I’m not worried about you; you seem to me to be progressing perfectly naturally.”	It seemed like an easy way to avoid everything, especially the thought of another pointless, boring year.

“You are tall—but you’re still very handsome—you’ve skipped the awkward age, or is that sixteen; perhaps it’s fourteen or fifteen; I can never remember; but you’ve skipped it.”	Beatrice was what might be termed a careful driver. “You are tall—but you’re still very handsome—you’ve skipped the awkward age, or is that sixteen; perhaps it’s fourteen or fifteen; I can never remember; but you’ve skipped it.” “Don’t embarrass me,” murmured Amory.	"You're tall and still very handsome. You missed the awkward age, or is that sixteen? Maybe it's fourteen or fifteen, I can never remember, but you didn't go through it."

“Not by a darned sight—unless we’re all children.	“Kids—child’s play!” scoffed his antagonist. “Not by a darned sight—unless we’re all children. Did you ever see a grown man when he’s trying for a secret society—or a rising family whose name is up at some club?	"Not even close—unless we're all acting like kids."

Your constancy Hath left you unattended.	I hear a knocking At the south entry: retire we to our chamber; A little water clears us of this deed: How easy is it, then! Your constancy Hath left you unattended. Hark!	Your firm resolve has made you act alone.

Maybe their wives have no social ambitions; maybe they’ve hit a sentence or two in a ‘dangerous book’ that pleased them; maybe they started on the treadmill as I did and were knocked off.	“Some men,” he continued, “escape the grip. Maybe their wives have no social ambitions; maybe they’ve hit a sentence or two in a ‘dangerous book’ that pleased them; maybe they started on the treadmill as I did and were knocked off. Anyway, they’re the congressmen you can’t bribe, the Presidents who aren’t politicians, the writers, speakers, scientists, statesmen who aren’t just popular grab-bags for a half-dozen women and children.”	Perhaps their wives don't care about social climbing; perhaps they read something thought-provoking in a "dangerous book" that resonated with them; perhaps they started out like me but managed to break free.

 She paused at the top of the staircase.	She paused at the top of the staircase. The sensations attributed to divers on springboards, leading ladies on opening nights, and lumpy, husky young men on the day of the Big Game, crowded through her.	She stopped at the top of the stairs.

Everybody in Minneapolis is going to go away to school.”	“Beatrice,” he said suddenly, “I want to go away to school. Everybody in Minneapolis is going to go away to school.” Beatrice showed some alarm.	Everyone in Minneapolis is planning to go away to school.

for from broad words and 'cause he fail'd His presence at the tyrant's feast, I hear Macduff lives in disgrace: sir, can you tell Where he bestows himself?	But, peace! for from broad words and 'cause he fail'd His presence at the tyrant's feast, I hear Macduff lives in disgrace: sir, can you tell Where he bestows himself?	Because of his outspoken words and his failure to attend the tyrant's feast, I hear Macduff is out of favor. Sir, can you tell me where he is staying?

“Swinburne’s ‘Song in the Time of Order’ might well have been Tennyson’s title.	“That was to a great extent Tennyson’s idea,” came the lecturer’s voice. “Swinburne’s ‘Song in the Time of Order’ might well have been Tennyson’s title. He idealized order against chaos, against waste.”	Tennyson could easily have named something of his Swinburne's 'Song in the Time of Order.'

I find thee apt; And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf, Wouldst thou not stir in this.	I find thee apt; And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf, Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear: ’Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard, A serpent stung me; so the whole ear of Denmark Is by a forged process of my death Rankly abused: but know, thou noble youth, The serpent that did sting thy father’s life Now wears his crown.	I see you're perceptive. You'd have to be more senseless than a plant growing by the river of forgetfulness not to be moved by this.

“It’s the one dividing line between good and evil.	“It’s the whole thing,” he asserted. “It’s the one dividing line between good and evil. I’ve never met a man who led a rotten life and didn’t have a weak will.”	It's what separates right from wrong.

He found it impossible to study conic sections; something in their calm and tantalizing respectability breathing defiantly through Mr. Rooney’s fetid parlors distorted their equations into insoluble anagrams.	Most of them were so stupid or careless that they wouldn’t admit when they didn’t understand, and Amory was of the latter. He found it impossible to study conic sections; something in their calm and tantalizing respectability breathing defiantly through Mr. Rooney’s fetid parlors distorted their equations into insoluble anagrams. He made a last night’s effort with the proverbial wet towel, and then blissfully took the exam, wondering unhappily why all the color and ambition of the spring before had faded out.	He couldn't study conic sections. Something about their boring and subtly mocking correctness, combined with the stuffy atmosphere of Mr. Rooney's classroom, made the equations seem like impossible puzzles.

Amory opened with grapeshot.	He turned to Sally and asked her if she was going away to school next year. Amory opened with grapeshot. “I’ve got an adjective that just fits you.”	Amory immediately launched a strong attack.

The club presidents are holding a meeting tonight to see if they can find a joint means of combating it.”	Burne Holiday is behind it. The club presidents are holding a meeting tonight to see if they can find a joint means of combating it.” “Well, what’s the idea of the thing?”	The club presidents are meeting tonight to find a way to fight it together.

Double, double toil and trouble; Fire burn and cauldron bubble.	Double, double toil and trouble; Fire burn and cauldron bubble.	Double, double toil and trouble; Fire burn and cauldron bubble.

“I knew you’d come tonight,” she said softly, “like summer, just when I needed you most.	He sat in the big chair and held out his arms so that she could nestle inside them. “I knew you’d come tonight,” she said softly, “like summer, just when I needed you most. darling.	“I knew you’d come tonight,” she said softly, “like summer, right when I needed you most."

As an actress even in the fullest flush of her own conscious magnetism gets a deep impression of most of the people in the front row, so Isabelle sized up her antagonist.	Froggy was fascinated and quite unconscious that this was being done, not for him, but for the green eyes that glistened under the shining carefully watered hair, a little to her left, for Isabelle had discovered Amory. As an actress even in the fullest flush of her own conscious magnetism gets a deep impression of most of the people in the front row, so Isabelle sized up her antagonist. First, he had auburn hair, and from her feeling of disappointment she knew that she had expected him to be dark and of garter-advertisement slenderness.	Like an actress who notices the audience even when she's at her most captivating, Isabelle quickly evaluated her rival.

He found that 12 University Place was a large, dilapidated mansion, at present apparently uninhabited, though he knew it housed usually a dozen freshmen.	He felt unnecessarily stiff and awkward among these white-flannelled, bareheaded youths, who must be juniors and seniors, judging from the savoir faire with which they strolled. He found that 12 University Place was a large, dilapidated mansion, at present apparently uninhabited, though he knew it housed usually a dozen freshmen. After a hurried skirmish with his landlady he sallied out on a tour of exploration, but he had gone scarcely a block when he became horribly conscious that he must be the only man in town who was wearing a hat.	He found that 12 University Place was a big, run-down house that looked empty, even though he knew it usually housed a dozen freshmen.

His mouth was the kind that is called frank, and he had steady gray eyes that moved slowly from one to the other of their group, with just the shade of a questioning expression.	Amory looked him over carefully and later he could have drawn him after a fashion, down to the merest details. His mouth was the kind that is called frank, and he had steady gray eyes that moved slowly from one to the other of their group, with just the shade of a questioning expression. Amory noticed his hands; they weren’t fine at all, but they had versatility and a tenuous strength.	He had an honest-looking mouth and calm gray eyes that slowly scanned their group with a slightly questioning look.

Our duty to your honour.	Our duty to your honour.	Our duty to your honor.

And, for an earnest of a greater honour, He bade me, from him, call thee thane of Cawdor: In which addition, hail, most worthy thane!	And, for an earnest of a greater honour, He bade me, from him, call thee thane of Cawdor: In which addition, hail, most worthy thane! For it is thine.	And as a down payment on even greater honors, he told me to announce that he names you Thane of Cawdor. So, with this new title, greetings, most worthy thane!

The sudden dawns we laughed to greet, That all could see, that none could share, Will be but dawns.	Desires that melted with the snow, And dreams begotten This today: The sudden dawns we laughed to greet, That all could see, that none could share, Will be but dawns. and if we meet We shall not care.	The sunrises we enjoyed together, that everyone could see but no one else experienced with us, will just be sunrises.

“There’s so much spring in the air—there’s so much lazy sweetness in your heart.”	“A lightweight is an eternal nay.” “There’s so much spring in the air—there’s so much lazy sweetness in your heart.” She dropped his arm.	"There's so much of the season in the air—there's so much easy happiness in your heart."

With affectionate regards, Thayer Darcy.	Do write me soon. With affectionate regards, Thayer Darcy. Even Amory’s reading paled during this period; he delved further into the misty side streets of literature: Huysmans, Walter Pater, Theophile Gautier, and the racier sections of Rabelais, Boccaccio, Petronius, and Suetonius.	Sincerely, Thayer Darcy.

Was’t Hamlet wrong’d Laertes?	What I have done, That might your nature, honour and exception Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness. Was’t Hamlet wrong’d Laertes? Never Hamlet: If Hamlet from himself be ta’en away, And when he’s not himself does wrong Laertes, Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it.	Did Hamlet wrong Laertes?

“Just to be dramatic, I’ll let you know that if it’s blue, my name is withdrawn from the editorial board of the Prince, and my short career is over.”	“Open it, Amory.” “Just to be dramatic, I’ll let you know that if it’s blue, my name is withdrawn from the editorial board of the Prince, and my short career is over.” He paused, and then saw for the first time Ferrenby’s eyes, wearing a hungry look and watching him eagerly.	"Just for the drama of it, if it's blue, I quit the Prince's editorial board, and my brief career is finished."

Thriftless ambition, that wilt ravin up Thine own life's means!	'Gainst nature still! Thriftless ambition, that wilt ravin up Thine own life's means! Then 'tis most like The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth.	Wasteful ambition, that will devour your own resources!

“You’re a slave, a bound helpless slave to one thing in the world, your imagination.”	She brought one little fist down onto the other. “You’re a slave, a bound helpless slave to one thing in the world, your imagination.” “You certainly interest me.	"You're a slave, completely controlled by your imagination."

you speak like a green girl, Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.	pooh! you speak like a green girl, Unsifted in such perilous circumstance. Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?	You're naive and inexperienced in this dangerous situation.

The raven himself is hoarse That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan Under my battlements.	Give him tending; He brings great news. The raven himself is hoarse That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan Under my battlements. Come, you spirits That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here, And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full Of direst cruelty!	Even the raven, a bird of ill omen, is losing its voice from announcing Duncan's deadly arrival at my castle.

Go to, I’ll no more on’t; it hath made me mad.	I have heard of your paintings too, well enough; God has given you one face, and you make yourselves another: you jig, you amble, and you lisp, and nick-name God’s creatures, and make your wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I’ll no more on’t; it hath made me mad. I say, we will have no more marriages: those that are married already, all but one, shall live; the rest shall keep as they are.	Enough, I'm done with it; it's made me crazy.

“But it took about ten thousand dollars to educate me where I could write your darned stuff for you.	You’d never worked before,” said Mr. Barlow coolly. “But it took about ten thousand dollars to educate me where I could write your darned stuff for you. Anyway, as far as length of service goes, you’ve got stenographers here you’ve paid fifteen a week for five years.”	It cost me about ten thousand dollars to get the education I needed to write this stuff for you.

On their heads were rakish college hats, pinned up in front and sporting bright orange-and-black bands, while from their celluloid collars blossomed flaming orange ties.	They had bought flaring suits with huge peg-top trousers and gigantic padded shoulders. On their heads were rakish college hats, pinned up in front and sporting bright orange-and-black bands, while from their celluloid collars blossomed flaming orange ties. They wore black armbands with orange “P’s,” and carried canes flying Princeton pennants, the effect completed by socks and peeping handkerchiefs in the same color motifs.	They wore jaunty college hats with orange and black bands, and bright orange ties under their collars.

I’m sure you would revel in it.	You must go into finance, Amory. I’m sure you would revel in it. You start as a messenger or a teller, I believe, and from that you go up—almost indefinitely.	I'm sure you'd love it.

“You’re mistaking this period when every nut is an individualist for a period of individualism.	Amory disagreed violently. “You’re mistaking this period when every nut is an individualist for a period of individualism. Wilson has only been powerful when he has represented; he’s had to compromise over and over again.	"You're confusing this time, when everyone claims to be unique, with a time of true individualism."

Amory decided to sit for a while on the front steps, so he bade them good night.	Come on, Burne.” Amory decided to sit for a while on the front steps, so he bade them good night. The great tapestries of trees had darkened to ghosts back at the last edge of twilight.	Amory decided to sit on the steps for a bit, so he said good night to them.

cried Amory at Olson.	“Shut up!” cried Amory at Olson. An instant’s pause.	Amory shouted at Olson.

This was allowing for the walk from her house—a walk concerning which he had afterward not the faintest recollection.	Later it would satisfy him in a vague way to be able to think “that thing ended at exactly twenty minutes after eight on Thursday, June 10, 1919.” This was allowing for the walk from her house—a walk concerning which he had afterward not the faintest recollection. He was in rather grotesque condition: two days of worry and nervousness, of sleepless nights, of untouched meals, culminating in the emotional crisis and Rosalind’s abrupt decision—the strain of it had drugged the foreground of his mind into a merciful coma.	This included the walk from her house, a walk he couldn't remember at all later.

Phoebe reappeared with sandwiches, brandy bottle, siphon, and four glasses.	“I don’t like this place,” Amory said sulkily, “and I don’t want any food.” Phoebe reappeared with sandwiches, brandy bottle, siphon, and four glasses. “Amory, pour ’em out,” she said, “and we’ll drink to Fred Sloane, who has a rare, distinguished edge.”	Phoebe came back with sandwiches, a bottle of brandy, a siphon, and four glasses.

Tom’s voice held an undertone of anxiety.	“Going out?” Tom’s voice held an undertone of anxiety. “Uh-huh.”	Tom sounded worried.

If it’s only a blue ribbon, I damn near believe they’ll work just as hard.	If the size of their house is the badge they’ll sweat their heads off for that. If it’s only a blue ribbon, I damn near believe they’ll work just as hard. They have in other ages.”	If it's just for recognition, I almost believe they'll work just as hard.

Shall I strike at it with my partisan?	Shall I strike at it with my partisan?	Shall I strike at it with my partisan?

He could not sleep, so he turned on his reading-lamp and, taking down the Kreutzer Sonata, searched it carefully for the germs of Burne’s enthusiasm.	He was not even a Catholic, yet that was the only ghost of a code that he had, the gaudy, ritualistic, paradoxical Catholicism whose prophet was Chesterton, whose claqueurs were such reformed rakes of literature as Huysmans and Bourget, whose American sponsor was Ralph Adams Cram, with his adulation of thirteenth-century cathedrals—a Catholicism which Amory found convenient and ready-made, without priest or sacraments or sacrifice. He could not sleep, so he turned on his reading-lamp and, taking down the Kreutzer Sonata, searched it carefully for the germs of Burne’s enthusiasm. Being Burne was suddenly so much realler than being clever.	He couldn't sleep, so he turned on his lamp and, grabbing the Kreutzer Sonata, looked through it for what Burne found so exciting.

And then Eleanor had part of another verse that she couldn’t find a beginning for: “But wisdom passes.	They quarrelled dangerously because Amory maintained that sea and see couldn’t possibly be used as a rhyme. And then Eleanor had part of another verse that she couldn’t find a beginning for: “But wisdom passes. still the years Will feed us wisdom.	Eleanor had part of another poem she couldn't start: "But wisdom passes."

Go thy ways to a nunnery.	We are arrant knaves, all; believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery. Where’s your father?	Go to a convent.

They curved tantalizingly, and she could catch just a glimpse of two pairs of masculine feet in the hall below.	Isabelle started toward the dressing-room for a last peek in the mirror, but something decided her to stand there and gaze down the broad stairs of the Minnehaha Club. They curved tantalizingly, and she could catch just a glimpse of two pairs of masculine feet in the hall below. Pump-shod in uniform black, they gave no hint of identity, but she wondered eagerly if one pair were attached to Amory Blaine.	The stairs curved in an enticing way, and she could just see two pairs of men's feet in the hall downstairs.

[Aside] Two truths are told, As happy prologues to the swelling act Of the imperial theme.—I thank you, gentlemen.	[Aside] Two truths are told, As happy prologues to the swelling act Of the imperial theme.—I thank you, gentlemen. Cannot be ill, cannot be good: if ill, Why hath it given me earnest of success, Commencing in a truth?	Two true things have been said, like a happy introduction to the main story about becoming king. I thank you, gentlemen.

As the door shut behind him, Amory stood a moment with his back against it.	The room was in darkness except for the faint glow of Tom’s cigarette where he lounged by the open window. As the door shut behind him, Amory stood a moment with his back against it. “Hello, Benvenuto Blaine.	After the door closed behind him, Amory stood still for a moment, leaning against it.

There was one brilliant place in Ha-Ha Hortense!	All Triangle shows started by being “something different—not just a regular musical comedy,” but when the several authors, the president, the coach and the faculty committee finished with it, there remained just the old reliable Triangle show with the old reliable jokes and the star comedian who got expelled or sick or something just before the trip, and the dark-whiskered man in the pony-ballet, who “absolutely won’t shave twice a day, doggone it!” There was one brilliant place in Ha-Ha Hortense! It is a Princeton tradition that whenever a Yale man who is a member of the widely advertised Skull and Bones hears the sacred name mentioned, he must leave the room.	Ha-Ha Hortense! had one really great part.

Amory marked himself a fortunate youth, capable of infinite expansion for good or evil.	He had realized that his best interests were bound up with those of a certain variant, changing person, whose label, in order that his past might always be identified with him, was Amory Blaine. Amory marked himself a fortunate youth, capable of infinite expansion for good or evil. He did not consider himself a “strong char’c’ter,” but relied on his facility (learn things sorta quick) and his superior mentality (read a lotta deep books).	Amory considered himself a lucky young man, capable of becoming infinitely good or bad.

Macduff, this noble passion, Child of integrity, hath from my soul Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts To thy good truth and honour.	Macduff, this noble passion, Child of integrity, hath from my soul Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts To thy good truth and honour. Devilish Macbeth By many of these trains hath sought to win me Into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me From over-credulous haste: but God above Deal between thee and me!	Macduff, this honorable emotion, born from your honesty, has erased my doubts and made me believe in your truth and honor.

“Oh, Alec, I believe I’m tired of college,” he said sadly, as they walked the dusk together.	During May he wrote thirty-page documents almost nightly, and sent them to her in bulky envelopes exteriorly labelled “Part I” and “Part II.” “Oh, Alec, I believe I’m tired of college,” he said sadly, as they walked the dusk together. “I think I am, too, in a way.”	"Oh, Alec, I think I'm tired of college," he said sadly as they walked together in the twilight.

“Heard the latest?” said Tom, coming in late one drizzly evening with that triumphant air he always wore after a successful conversational bout.	Amory, through Kerry, had had a vague drifting acquaintance with him, but not until January of senior year did their friendship commence. “Heard the latest?” said Tom, coming in late one drizzly evening with that triumphant air he always wore after a successful conversational bout. “No.	"Did you hear the news?" Tom asked, arriving late on a rainy evening with that proud look he always had after a good conversation.

did he not straight In pious rage the two delinquents tear, That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep?	How it did grieve Macbeth! did he not straight In pious rage the two delinquents tear, That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep? Was not that nobly done?	Didn't he immediately, in righteous anger, kill the two guilty ones who were overcome by drunkenness and sleep?

“Well, the next one?” “What—ah—er—I swear I’ve got to go cut in—look me up when she’s got a dance free.”	I’ve got to cut in on a fella.” “Well, the next one?” “What—ah—er—I swear I’ve got to go cut in—look me up when she’s got a dance free.” It delighted Amory when Isabelle suggested that they leave for a while and drive around in her car.	"Okay, the next dance?" "Um—I really need to cut in on someone—find me when she's not dancing."

Of all men else I have avoided thee: But get thee back; my soul is too much charged With blood of thine already.	Of all men else I have avoided thee: But get thee back; my soul is too much charged With blood of thine already.	I've avoided you more than anyone: But go away; I already feel too guilty about killing your people.

Thou wast born of woman But swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn,	Thou wast born of woman But swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn, Brandish'd by man that's of a woman born.	You were born of a woman, but swords make me smile, and I laugh at weapons.

Thou pray’st not well.	Thou pray’st not well.	You don't pray properly.

He used to go for far walks by himself—and wander along reciting “Ulalume” to the cornfields, and congratulating Poe for drinking himself to death in that atmosphere of smiling complacency.	Amory was bored, as he usually was in the country. He used to go for far walks by himself—and wander along reciting “Ulalume” to the cornfields, and congratulating Poe for drinking himself to death in that atmosphere of smiling complacency. One afternoon he had strolled for several miles along a road that was new to him, and then through a wood on bad advice from a colored woman.	He'd go on long walks alone, reciting "Ulalume" to the cornfields and sarcastically praising Poe for drinking himself to death in such a self-satisfied environment.

falling behind the Groton goal with two men on his legs, in the only touchdown of the game.	finally bruised and weary, but still elusive, circling an end, twisting, changing pace, straight-arming. falling behind the Groton goal with two men on his legs, in the only touchdown of the game.	Scoring the game's only touchdown while being tackled behind the Groton goal line.

Strange damps—full of the eyes of many men, crowded with life borne in upon a lull.	The February streets, wind-washed by night, blow full of strange half-intermittent damps, bearing on wasted walks in shining sight wet snow plashed into gleams under the lamps, like golden oil from some divine machine, in an hour of thaw and stars. Strange damps—full of the eyes of many men, crowded with life borne in upon a lull. Oh, I was young, for I could turn again to you, most finite and most beautiful, and taste the stuff of half-remembered dreams, sweet and new on your mouth.	Strange, damp air—filled with the gazes of many people, teeming with life that rushes in during a quiet moment.

This took his mind off the play, and he wondered if he really did seem handsome to the population of New York.	When the curtain fell for the last time he gave such a long sigh that the people in front of him twisted around and stared and said loud enough for him to hear: “What a remarkable-looking boy!” This took his mind off the play, and he wondered if he really did seem handsome to the population of New York. Paskert and he walked in silence toward their hotel.	This made him stop thinking about the play, and he wondered if people in New York actually thought he was good-looking.

The crowd around the table thickened.	Let her hang!” The crowd around the table thickened. For an instant a brawl threatened, but a sleek waiter bent back Margaret Diamond’s fingers until she released her hold on Amory, whereupon she slapped the waiter furiously in the face and flung her arms about her raging original escort.	More people gathered around the table.

It put them on equal terms, although she was quite capable of staging her own romances, with or without advance advertising.	This had pleased Isabelle. It put them on equal terms, although she was quite capable of staging her own romances, with or without advance advertising. But following her happy tremble of anticipation, came a sinking sensation that made her ask: “How do you mean he’s heard about me?	It made them even, even though she could create her own love stories, with or without making them public.

Wretched queen, adieu!	I am dead, Horatio. Wretched queen, adieu! You that look pale and tremble at this chance, That are but mutes or audience to this act, Had I but time—as this fell sergeant, death, Is strict in his arrest—O, I could tell you— But let it be.	Goodbye, miserable queen!

There are times when I think of the men out there as Roman legionaries, miles from their corrupt city, stemming back the hordes.	Amory, lately I reread Aeschylus and there in the divine irony of the Agamemnon I find the only answer to this bitter age—all the world tumbled about our ears, and the closest parallel ages back in that hopeless resignation. There are times when I think of the men out there as Roman legionaries, miles from their corrupt city, stemming back the hordes. hordes a little more menacing, after all, than the corrupt city.	Sometimes I see the soldiers as Roman legionaries, far from their decaying civilization, holding back the enemy.

they were nervous hands that sat lightly along the cushions and moved constantly with little jerky openings and closings.	Amory noticed his hands; they weren’t fine at all, but they had versatility and a tenuous strength. they were nervous hands that sat lightly along the cushions and moved constantly with little jerky openings and closings. Then, suddenly, Amory perceived the feet, and with a rush of blood to the head he realized he was afraid.	His fidgety hands barely touched the cushions, always moving, opening and closing restlessly.

Season your admiration for a while With an attent ear, till I may deliver, Upon the witness of these gentlemen, This marvel to you.	Season your admiration for a while With an attent ear, till I may deliver, Upon the witness of these gentlemen, This marvel to you.	Hold your amazement for a moment and listen carefully to what I say, because these gentlemen can confirm this incredible thing I'm about to tell you.

“Rotten, rotten old world,” broke out Eleanor suddenly, “and the wretchedest thing of all is me—oh, why am I a girl?	Where the fall met the ground a hundred feet below, a black stream made a sharp line, broken by tiny glints in the swift water. “Rotten, rotten old world,” broke out Eleanor suddenly, “and the wretchedest thing of all is me—oh, why am I a girl? Why am I not a stupid—?	"This world is awful," Eleanor burst out, "and I'm the worst of all. Oh, why am I a girl?"

I could interpret between you and your love, if I could see the puppets dallying.	I could interpret between you and your love, if I could see the puppets dallying.	I could help you communicate with your lover if I could see you two flirting.

He was unaware that his failure to be cockney was ruining his standing.	“Oh, yeah,” he declared, “she’s here.” He was unaware that his failure to be cockney was ruining his standing. Amory considered him coldly.	He didn't realize that not sounding like a Cockney was hurting his reputation.

To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow, Creeps in this petty pace from day to day To the last syllable of recorded time, And all our yesterdays have lighted fools The way to dusty death.	She should have died hereafter; There would have been a time for such a word. To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow, Creeps in this petty pace from day to day To the last syllable of recorded time, And all our yesterdays have lighted fools The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle!	Tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow, life drags on slowly, day after day, until the very end of time, and all our pasts have shown fools the path to death.

They set off at a good gait, and for an hour swung along in a brisk argument until the lights of Princeton were luminous white blots behind them.	“Doesn’t sound very appealing to me,” admitted Amory reluctantly, “but let’s go.” They set off at a good gait, and for an hour swung along in a brisk argument until the lights of Princeton were luminous white blots behind them. “Any person with any imagination is bound to be afraid,” said Burne earnestly.	They started off at a good pace, and for an hour continued walking and arguing energetically until the lights of Princeton became glowing white spots behind them.

I mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation laid on him by them, in his meed he’s unfellowed.	I mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation laid on him by them, in his meed he’s unfellowed.	I'm talking about his skill with a weapon, sir; but as for the accusation they've made against him, he's unmatched in his deserving of it.

Her words began ringing in his ears: “Don’t ever forget me, Amory—don’t ever forget me—” “Hell!”	Again he saw Rosalind curled weeping among the pillows, again he felt her tears against his cheek. Her words began ringing in his ears: “Don’t ever forget me, Amory—don’t ever forget me—” “Hell!” he faltered aloud, and then he choked and collapsed on the bed in a shaken spasm of grief.	Her words kept repeating in his head: "Don't ever forget me, Amory—don't ever forget me—" "Hell!"

Ay, marry, is’t; crowner’s quest law.	Ay, marry, is’t; crowner’s quest law.	Yes, indeed it is; it's coroner's inquest law.

And can you, by no drift of circumstance, Get from him why he puts on this confusion, Grating so harshly all his days of quiet With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?	And can you, by no drift of circumstance, Get from him why he puts on this confusion, Grating so harshly all his days of quiet With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?	And can you, by any chance, find out why he's acting so crazy, disrupting his peaceful life with this wild and dangerous madness?

Make we our march towards Birnam.	Or so much as it needs, To dew the sovereign flower and drown the weeds. Make we our march towards Birnam.	Let's march toward Birnam.

O, yet I do repent me of my fury, That I did kill them.	O, yet I do repent me of my fury, That I did kill them.	Oh, I still regret my anger that made me kill them.

Ourself will mingle with society, And play the humble host.	Ourself will mingle with society, And play the humble host. Our hostess keeps her state, but in best time We will require her welcome.	I will join the party and act as a regular host.

He had shown off one day in French class (he was in senior French class) to the utter confusion of Mr. Reardon, whose accent Amory damned contemptuously, and to the delight of the class.	He had been two months in Minneapolis, and his chief struggle had been the concealing from “the other guys at school” how particularly superior he felt himself to be, yet this conviction was built upon shifting sands. He had shown off one day in French class (he was in senior French class) to the utter confusion of Mr. Reardon, whose accent Amory damned contemptuously, and to the delight of the class. Mr. Reardon, who had spent several weeks in Paris ten years before, took his revenge on the verbs, whenever he had his book open.	One day, he showed off in French class (which was a senior-level class). This completely confused Mr. Reardon, whose accent Amory criticized disrespectfully, but the class loved it.

Why in that rawness left you wife and child, Those precious motives, those strong knots of love, Without leave-taking?	Perchance even there where I did find my doubts. Why in that rawness left you wife and child, Those precious motives, those strong knots of love, Without leave-taking? I pray you, Let not my jealousies be your dishonours, But mine own safeties.	Why did you abandon your wife and child so callously, those dear reasons for living, those strong bonds of love, without even saying goodbye?

hordes a little more menacing, after all, than the corrupt city.	There are times when I think of the men out there as Roman legionaries, miles from their corrupt city, stemming back the hordes. hordes a little more menacing, after all, than the corrupt city. another blind blow at the race, furies that we passed with ovations years ago, over whose corpses we bleated triumphantly all through the Victorian era.	The enemy is more dangerous than our own corrupt society.

Burne hurried on, and it was several days before Amory heard an account of the ensuing conversation.	Either I’ve misjudged him or he’s suddenly become the world’s worst radical.” Burne hurried on, and it was several days before Amory heard an account of the ensuing conversation. Burne had come into the editor’s sanctum displaying the paper cheerfully.	Burne moved on quickly, and it took Amory several days to hear what happened in the conversation that followed.

Listening their fear, I could not say 'Amen,' When they did say 'God bless us!'	and 'Amen' the other; As they had seen me with these hangman's hands. Listening their fear, I could not say 'Amen,' When they did say 'God bless us!'	Hearing their fear, I couldn't say "Amen" when they said "God bless us!"

Eleanor Savage, materiologist—no jumping, no starting, come early—” “But I have to have a soul,” he objected.	Conscience—kill it like me! Eleanor Savage, materiologist—no jumping, no starting, come early—” “But I have to have a soul,” he objected. “I can’t be rational—and I won’t be molecular.”	Eleanor Savage, materiologist—no sudden movements, no panicking, be on time—” “But I need to have a soul,” he argued.

And, I believe, it is a fetch of wit: You laying these slight sullies on my son, As ’twere a thing a little	Marry, sir, here’s my drift; And, I believe, it is a fetch of wit: You laying these slight sullies on my son, As ’twere a thing a little soil’d i’ the working, Mark you, Your party in converse, him you would sound, Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured He closes with you in this consequence; “Good sir,” or so, or “friend,” or “gentleman,” According to the phrase or the addition Of man and country.	And, I believe, it's a clever trick: you putting these small stains on my son, as if he were something a little

At the best I can have my choice from one or two cities and, of course, I have to marry into a dinner-coat.	Every year that I don’t marry I’ve got less chance for a first-class man. At the best I can have my choice from one or two cities and, of course, I have to marry into a dinner-coat. “Listen,” she leaned close again, “I like clever men and good-looking men, and, of course, no one cares more for personality than I do.	At best, I can only choose from men in one or two cities, and I need to marry someone who is wealthy.

She had begun as he had, with good looks and an excitable temperament, and the rest was the result of accessible popular novels and dressing-room conversation culled from a slightly older set.	Moreover, amateur standing had very little value in the game they were playing, a game that would presumably be her principal study for years to come. She had begun as he had, with good looks and an excitable temperament, and the rest was the result of accessible popular novels and dressing-room conversation culled from a slightly older set. Isabelle had walked with an artificial gait at nine and a half, and when her eyes, wide and starry, proclaimed the ingenue most, Amory was proportionately less deceived.	She started out like him, with attractiveness and an emotional personality, and everything else she learned came from easily available popular books and gossip picked up from older people in dressing rooms.

He enjoyed both Vachel Lindsay and Booth Tarkington, and admired the conscientious, if slender, artistry of Edgar Lee Masters.	Amory did not entirely agree with Tom’s sweeping damnation of American novelists and poets. He enjoyed both Vachel Lindsay and Booth Tarkington, and admired the conscientious, if slender, artistry of Edgar Lee Masters. “What I hate is this idiotic drivel about ‘I am God—I am man—I ride the winds—I look through the smoke—I am the life sense.’ ”	He liked Vachel Lindsay and Booth Tarkington, and he appreciated Edgar Lee Masters' careful, though limited, skill.

Amory knew that every time he had reached toward it longingly it had leered out at him with the grotesque face of evil.	Inseparably linked with evil was beauty—beauty, still a constant rising tumult; soft in Eleanor’s voice, in an old song at night, rioting deliriously through life like superimposed waterfalls, half rhythm, half darkness. Amory knew that every time he had reached toward it longingly it had leered out at him with the grotesque face of evil. Beauty of great art, beauty of all joy, most of all the beauty of women.	Every time Amory reached for beauty, it had mocked him with the ugly face of evil.

let me see: We’ll make a solemn wager on your cunnings: I ha’t.	Soft! let me see: We’ll make a solemn wager on your cunnings: I ha’t.	Let me see... We'll make a serious bet about your skills: I've got it!

The latter was a quiet, rather aloof slicker from Hotchkiss, who lived next door and shared the same enforced singleness as Amory, due to the fact that his entire class had gone to Yale.	Once a day Amory indulged in a club sandwich, cornflakes, and Julienne potatoes at Joe’s, accompanied usually by Kerry or Alec Connage. The latter was a quiet, rather aloof slicker from Hotchkiss, who lived next door and shared the same enforced singleness as Amory, due to the fact that his entire class had gone to Yale. Joe’s was unaesthetic and faintly unsanitary, but a limitless charge account could be opened there, a convenience that Amory appreciated.	Alec Connage, a smooth but quiet and distant guy from Hotchkiss, lived next door and, like Amory, was also without a girlfriend because his whole class went to Yale.

It gave a musical comedy every year, travelling with cast, chorus, orchestra, and scenery all through Christmas vacation.	A great, seething anthill was the Triangle Club. It gave a musical comedy every year, travelling with cast, chorus, orchestra, and scenery all through Christmas vacation. The play and music were the work of undergraduates, and the club itself was the most influential of institutions, over three hundred men competing for it every year.	Each year, they put on a musical comedy and toured with the actors, singers, orchestra, and sets during the entire Christmas break.

A pestilence on him for a mad rogue!	A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! a’ poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once.	Curse him for a crazy scoundrel!

“How much or how little I’m taking this stand because of propaganda I’ve heard, I don’t know; naturally I think that it’s my most innermost conviction—it seems a path spread before me just now.”	“That’s the chance, of course,” he said slowly. “How much or how little I’m taking this stand because of propaganda I’ve heard, I don’t know; naturally I think that it’s my most innermost conviction—it seems a path spread before me just now.” Amory’s heart sank.	"I don't know how much my stance is influenced by propaganda. I naturally believe it's my deepest conviction—it feels like the right path for me right now."

He found himself reading the same paragraphs over and over, so he abandoned this attempt and leaning over wearily pressed his hot forehead against the damp windowpane.	The presence of a painted woman across the aisle filled him with a fresh burst of sickness and he changed to another car, tried to concentrate on an article in a popular magazine. He found himself reading the same paragraphs over and over, so he abandoned this attempt and leaning over wearily pressed his hot forehead against the damp windowpane. The car, a smoker, was hot and stuffy with most of the smells of the state’s alien population; he opened a window and shivered against the cloud of fog that drifted in over him.	He kept reading the same paragraphs repeatedly, so he gave up and, feeling tired, leaned forward and pressed his hot forehead against the cold, wet window.

Amory watched them in fascination.	New faces flashed on and off like myriad lights, pale or rouged faces, tired, yet sustained by a weary excitement. Amory watched them in fascination. He was planning his life.	Amory watched them, fascinated.

He stepped into the hall and then waited at the top of the stairs, for he heard footsteps coming.	How conveniently well he looked, and how well a dinner coat became him. He stepped into the hall and then waited at the top of the stairs, for he heard footsteps coming. It was Isabelle, and from the top of her shining hair to her little golden slippers she had never seemed so beautiful.	He went into the hallway and waited at the top of the stairs because he heard someone approaching.

Langueduc lazily shifts his six-foot-three of football material and tries to concentrate.	“Now, Langueduc, if I used that formula, where would my A point be?” Langueduc lazily shifts his six-foot-three of football material and tries to concentrate. “Oh—ah—I’m damned if I know, Mr. Rooney.”	Langueduc, a big football player, lazily moves and tries to focus.

My thanes and kinsmen, Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland In such an honour named.	We shall not spend a large expense of time Before we reckon with your several loves, And make us even with you. My thanes and kinsmen, Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland In such an honour named. What's more to do, Which would be planted newly with the time, As calling home our exiled friends abroad That fled the snares of watchful tyranny; Producing forth the cruel ministers Of this dead butcher and his fiend-like queen, Who, as 'tis thought, by self and violent hands Took off her life; this, and what needful else That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace, We will perform in measure, time and place:	My nobles and relatives, from now on you will be earls, the first ever in Scotland to be given this title.

We can attract people, we can make atmosphere, we can almost lose our Celtic souls in Celtic subtleties, we can almost always have our own way; but splendid—rather not!	We are many other things—we’re extraordinary, we’re clever, we could be said, I suppose, to be brilliant. We can attract people, we can make atmosphere, we can almost lose our Celtic souls in Celtic subtleties, we can almost always have our own way; but splendid—rather not! I am going to Rome with a wonderful dossier and letters of introduction that cover every capital in Europe, and there will be “no small stir” when I get there.	We can charm people, create a mood, get lost in intricate Celtic thoughts, and almost always get what we want; but splendid? I don't think so!

Amory was in full stride, confident, nervous, and jubilant.	She had gone to Baltimore to live—but since then she had developed a past. Amory was in full stride, confident, nervous, and jubilant. Scurrying back to Minneapolis to see a girl he had known as a child seemed the interesting and romantic thing to do, so without compunction he wired his mother not to expect him.	Amory was at his peak, feeling confident, nervous, and thrilled.

Amory’s heart sank.	“How much or how little I’m taking this stand because of propaganda I’ve heard, I don’t know; naturally I think that it’s my most innermost conviction—it seems a path spread before me just now.” Amory’s heart sank. “But think of the cheapness of it—no one’s really going to martyr you for being a pacifist—it’s just going to throw you in with the worst—” “I doubt it,” he interrupted.	Amory felt a sinking feeling.

To Amory it was a haunting grief to see him lying in his coffin, with closed hands upon his purple vestments.	Thornton Hancock, Mrs. Lawrence, the British and Italian ambassadors, the papal delegate, and a host of friends and priests were there—yet the inexorable shears had cut through all these threads that Monsignor had gathered into his hands. To Amory it was a haunting grief to see him lying in his coffin, with closed hands upon his purple vestments. His face had not changed, and, as he never knew he was dying, it showed no pain or fear.	It was deeply saddening for Amory to see him lying in his coffin, hands folded on his purple robes.

“And this very walking at night is one of the things I was afraid about.	“Any person with any imagination is bound to be afraid,” said Burne earnestly. “And this very walking at night is one of the things I was afraid about. I’m going to tell you why I can walk anywhere now and not be afraid.”	Walking around at night was one of the things that scared me.

Phyllis’s feelings as she was paraded by the Harvard and Princeton stands, where sat dozens of her former devotees, can be imagined.	She was vociferously greeted and escorted enthusiastically across the campus, followed by half a hundred village urchins—to the stifled laughter of hundreds of alumni and visitors, half of whom had no idea that this was a practical joke, but thought that Burne and Fred were two varsity sports showing their girl a collegiate time. Phyllis’s feelings as she was paraded by the Harvard and Princeton stands, where sat dozens of her former devotees, can be imagined. She tried to walk a little ahead, she tried to walk a little behind—but they stayed close, that there should be no doubt whom she was with, talking in loud voices of their friends on the football team, until she could almost hear her acquaintances whispering: “Phyllis Styles must be awfully hard up to have to come with those two.”	You can only imagine how Phyllis felt being shown off like that in front of all her old admirers from Harvard and Princeton.

In the spring he read L’Allegro, by request, and was inspired to lyrical outpourings on the subject of Arcady and the pipes of Pan.	Many nights he lay there dreaming awake of secret cafés in Mont Martre, where ivory women delved in romantic mysteries with diplomats and soldiers of fortune, while orchestras played Hungarian waltzes and the air was thick and exotic with intrigue and moonlight and adventure. In the spring he read L’Allegro, by request, and was inspired to lyrical outpourings on the subject of Arcady and the pipes of Pan. He moved his bed so that the sun would wake him at dawn that he might dress and go out to the archaic swing that hung from an apple-tree near the sixth-form house.	In the spring, he read "L'Allegro" because someone asked him to, and it made him write poetic pieces about Arcady and Pan's flute.

“They say Overton fainted when he got his Ivy bid—Did he sign up the first day?—oh, no.	“Well, I didn’t go Cottage—the parlor-snakes’ delight.” “They say Overton fainted when he got his Ivy bid—Did he sign up the first day?—oh, no. Tore over to Murray-Dodge on a bicycle—afraid it was a mistake.”	"They say Overton passed out when he got his invitation to join the Ivy Club. Did he sign up right away? Oh, no.

“I don’t agree with you—I don’t believe in ‘muscular Christianity.’ ” “I do—I believe Christ had great physical vigor.”	Burne had gone into the biology of this, and then: “Of course health counts—a healthy man has twice the chance of being good,” he said. “I don’t agree with you—I don’t believe in ‘muscular Christianity.’ ” “I do—I believe Christ had great physical vigor.” “Oh, no,” Amory protested.	"I disagree with you. I don't believe being physically strong makes you more Christian." "I do. I believe Christ was very physically strong."

Or that the Everlasting had not fix’d His canon ’gainst self-slaughter!	O, that this too too solid flesh would melt, Thaw and resolve itself into a dew! Or that the Everlasting had not fix’d His canon ’gainst self-slaughter! O God!	I wish God had not made a law against suicide!

He fancied himself an athlete of possibilities and a supple dancer.	He was. He fancied himself an athlete of possibilities and a supple dancer. Socially.—Here his condition was, perhaps, most dangerous.	He thought he could achieve anything and move with ease.

The time is out of joint: O cursed spite, That ever I was born to set it right!	Let us go in together; And still your fingers on your lips, I pray. The time is out of joint: O cursed spite, That ever I was born to set it right! Nay, come, let’s go together.	Something's wrong with the world: It's my terrible fate that I have to fix it!

“He dances as if the girl were on his back instead of in his arms.”	Amory laughed. “He dances as if the girl were on his back instead of in his arms.” She appreciated this.	He dances like he's carrying her instead of holding her.

Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck, Till thou applaud the deed.	Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck, Till thou applaud the deed. Come, seeling night, Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day; And with thy bloody and invisible hand Cancel and tear to pieces that great bond Which keeps me pale!	My dear, don't know anything about this until you approve of what I've done.

The truth is that the public has done one of those startling and amazing things that they do about once in a hundred years.	“You won’t listen to the moderates, and it’s almost too late. The truth is that the public has done one of those startling and amazing things that they do about once in a hundred years. They’ve seized an idea.”	The truth is, the public has done something amazing and unexpected, something they rarely do.

She took a nail scissors, clipped out the ‘My God’ and showed the rest of the letter all over school.	In one place I got rattled and said: ‘My God, how I love you!’ She took a nail scissors, clipped out the ‘My God’ and showed the rest of the letter all over school. Doesn’t work at all.	She took nail scissors, cut out the words "My God," and then showed the rest of the letter to everyone at school.

thy face is valanced since I saw thee last: comest thou to beard me in Denmark?	O, my old friend! thy face is valanced since I saw thee last: comest thou to beard me in Denmark? What, my young lady and mistress!	Your face has grown a beard since I last saw you. Have you come to challenge me in Denmark?

make thick my blood; Stop up the access and passage to remorse, That no compunctious visitings of nature Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between The effect and it!	Come, you spirits That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here, And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full Of direst cruelty! make thick my blood; Stop up the access and passage to remorse, That no compunctious visitings of nature Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between The effect and it! Come to my woman's breasts, And take my milk for gall, you murdering ministers, Wherever in your sightless substances You wait on nature's mischief!	Make my blood thick; block any feelings of guilt or regret, so that no natural feelings of compassion weaken my cruel intentions or prevent me from acting on them!

 “All right, ponies!”	“All right, ponies!” “Shake it up!”	Alright, everyone!

Before my body I throw my warlike shield.	Though Birnam wood be come to Dunsinane, And thou opposed, being of no woman born, Yet I will try the last. Before my body I throw my warlike shield. Lay on, Macduff, And damn'd be him that first cries, 'Hold, enough!'	I'll fight to the death.

There was no need to ask what girl he referred to.	His uncertain fifteen-year-old voice broke in in a melancholy strain on Amory’s musings: “I’d marry that girl tonight.” There was no need to ask what girl he referred to. “I’d be proud to take her home and introduce her to my people,” continued Paskert.	It was obvious which girl he was talking about.

“Oh, I suppose heaven would, if there was one,” she said finally, “a sort of pagan heaven—you ought to be a materialist,” she continued irrelevantly.	She thought a moment. “Oh, I suppose heaven would, if there was one,” she said finally, “a sort of pagan heaven—you ought to be a materialist,” she continued irrelevantly. “Why?”	"Well, if heaven existed," she said, after thinking for a bit, "it would be like a pagan heaven. You should be a materialist," she added, changing the subject.

Am I not i’ the right, old Jephthah?	Am I not i’ the right, old Jephthah?	Am I not right, old Jephthah?

the invisible king—the élan vital—the principle of evolution.	people plunging blindly in and then rushing wildly back, shouting that they had found it. the invisible king—the élan vital—the principle of evolution. writing a book, starting a war, founding a school.	The unseen force, the life energy, the way things change over time.

Especially as father says the money isn’t forthcoming as it used to be.”	But marry—not a chance. Especially as father says the money isn’t forthcoming as it used to be.” “What a waste these nights are!” agreed Alec.	Especially since father says the money isn't coming as easily as it used to.

It’s the only panacea I know.	“This is the first time in my life I’ve argued Socialism. It’s the only panacea I know. I’m restless.	It's the only cure-all I know.

“Because it’s a gentleman’s school, and democracy won’t hit you so early.	“Why?” “Because it’s a gentleman’s school, and democracy won’t hit you so early. You’ll find plenty of that in college.”	Because it's a school for gentlemen, and you won't be exposed to democracy so soon.

Disdaining fortune, with his brandish'd steel, Which smoked with bloody execution, Like valour's minion carved out his passage Till he faced the slave;	The merciless Macdonwald— Worthy to be a rebel, for to that The multiplying villanies of nature Do swarm upon him—from the western isles Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied; And fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling, Show'd like a rebel's whore: but all's too weak: For brave Macbeth—well he deserves that name— Disdaining fortune, with his brandish'd steel, Which smoked with bloody execution, Like valour's minion carved out his passage Till he faced the slave;	Ignoring luck, with his sword dripping blood from killing, like valor's favorite, he fought his way until he confronted the traitor.

[Aside] Glamis, and thane of Cawdor!	[Aside] Glamis, and thane of Cawdor! The greatest is behind.	I'm the Thane of Glamis and now the Thane of Cawdor!

“Heard the latest?” said Tom, coming in late one drizzly evening with that triumphant air he always wore after a successful conversational bout.	Amory, through Kerry, had had a vague drifting acquaintance with him, but not until January of senior year did their friendship commence. “Heard the latest?” said Tom, coming in late one drizzly evening with that triumphant air he always wore after a successful conversational bout. “No.	"Did you hear the news?" Tom asked, arriving late on a rainy evening with the proud look he always had after a good conversation.

Oh, she was magnificent—pale skin, the color of marble in starlight, slender brows, and eyes that glittered green as emeralds in the blinding glare.	Suddenly the lightning flashed in with a leap of overreaching light and he saw Eleanor, and looked for the first time into those eyes of hers. Oh, she was magnificent—pale skin, the color of marble in starlight, slender brows, and eyes that glittered green as emeralds in the blinding glare. She was a witch, of perhaps nineteen, he judged, alert and dreamy and with the telltale white line over her upper lip that was a weakness and a delight.	She was magnificent—pale skin like marble in starlight, thin eyebrows, and eyes that shone green like emeralds in the bright flash.

that made them vaguely wonder why it did not sound quite clear, but never question that it was the utterance of a supersoul.	Tanaduke was a sophomore, with tremendous ears and a way of saying, “The earth swirls down through the ominous moons of preconsidered generations!” that made them vaguely wonder why it did not sound quite clear, but never question that it was the utterance of a supersoul. At least so Tom and Amory took him.	that made them wonder why it wasn't completely understandable, but they never doubted it was profound.

A last burst of singing flooded up from Blair Arch—broken voices for some long parting.	“You know,” whispered Tom, “what we feel now is the sense of all the gorgeous youth that has rioted through here in two hundred years.” A last burst of singing flooded up from Blair Arch—broken voices for some long parting. “And what we leave here is more than this class; it’s the whole heritage of youth.	Singing, rough and loud, rose from Blair Arch as people said goodbye.

“It’s a man—don’t you know?”	Who wrote it?” “It’s a man—don’t you know?” “Oh, surely.”	"It's a man—didn't you know that?"

At this Isabelle’s little fist had clinched suddenly under the fur robe.	I guess he knows you’ve been kissed.” At this Isabelle’s little fist had clinched suddenly under the fur robe. She was accustomed to be thus followed by her desperate past, and it never failed to rouse in her the same feeling of resentment; yet—in a strange town it was an advantageous reputation.	Isabelle's fist clenched under the fur robe.

“Servant-girls are that way,” says Mrs. Huston-Carmelite to her popular daughter.	None of the Victorian mothers—and most of the mothers were Victorian—had any idea how casually their daughters were accustomed to be kissed. “Servant-girls are that way,” says Mrs. Huston-Carmelite to her popular daughter. “They are kissed first and proposed to afterward.”	"That's how servant-girls are," Mrs. Huston-Carmelite says to her popular daughter.

“But think of the cheapness of it—no one’s really going to martyr you for being a pacifist—it’s just going to throw you in with the worst—” “I doubt it,” he interrupted.	Amory’s heart sank. “But think of the cheapness of it—no one’s really going to martyr you for being a pacifist—it’s just going to throw you in with the worst—” “I doubt it,” he interrupted. “Well, it all smells of Bohemian New York to me.”	"But think how easy it is—no one will actually die for being a pacifist—it'll just lump you in with the worst people—" "I doubt it," he interrupted.

and like a sombre background lay that incident of the spring before, that filled half his nights with a dreary terror and made him unable to pray.	He had fallen into a deep cynicism over what had crossed his path, plotted the imperfectability of man and read Shaw and Chesterton enough to keep his mind from the edges of decadence—now suddenly all his mental processes of the last year and a half seemed stale and futile—a petty consummation of himself. and like a sombre background lay that incident of the spring before, that filled half his nights with a dreary terror and made him unable to pray. He was not even a Catholic, yet that was the only ghost of a code that he had, the gaudy, ritualistic, paradoxical Catholicism whose prophet was Chesterton, whose claqueurs were such reformed rakes of literature as Huysmans and Bourget, whose American sponsor was Ralph Adams Cram, with his adulation of thirteenth-century cathedrals—a Catholicism which Amory found convenient and ready-made, without priest or sacraments or sacrifice.	And in the back of his mind was that incident from last spring, which filled his nights with dread and made him unable to pray.

He was awakened by a woman clinging to him, a pretty woman, with brown, disarranged hair and dark blue eyes.	To his relief no one applauded the idea, so having finished his highball, he balanced his chin in his hand and his elbow on the table—a most delicate, scarcely noticeable sleeping position, he assured himself—and went into a deep stupor. He was awakened by a woman clinging to him, a pretty woman, with brown, disarranged hair and dark blue eyes. “Take me home!”	A pretty woman with messy brown hair and dark blue eyes woke him up by grabbing onto him.

All through supper he addressed her in the most respectful language, while Kerry made idiotic love to her on the other side, and she giggled and grinned.	“She prefers her native dishes,” said Alec gravely to the waiter, “but any coarse food will do.” All through supper he addressed her in the most respectful language, while Kerry made idiotic love to her on the other side, and she giggled and grinned. Amory was content to sit and watch the byplay, thinking what a light touch Kerry had, and how he could transform the barest incident into a thing of curve and contour.	Throughout the meal, he spoke to her with utmost respect, while Kerry flirted with her foolishly from the other side, and she just giggled and grinned.

This particular day on which he announced his ennui to Tom had been quite typical.	Nevertheless, even though it might not yield a cent for the next three years, Amory decided with a vague sentimentality that for the present, at any rate, he would not sell the house. This particular day on which he announced his ennui to Tom had been quite typical. He had risen at noon, lunched with Mrs. Lawrence, and then ridden abstractedly homeward atop one of his beloved buses.	The day he told Tom he was bored was a normal day for him.

Ay, my good lord: safe in a ditch he bides, With twenty trenched gashes on his head; The least a death to nature.	Ay, my good lord: safe in a ditch he bides, With twenty trenched gashes on his head; The least a death to nature.	Yes, my lord: he's lying safely in a ditch, with twenty deep cuts on his head; any one of them would be enough to kill him.

Nor do we find him forward to be sounded, But, with a crafty madness, keeps aloof, When we would bring him on to some confession Of his true state.	Nor do we find him forward to be sounded, But, with a crafty madness, keeps aloof, When we would bring him on to some confession Of his true state.	We can't get him to open up. He cleverly pretends to be crazy and stays distant when we try to get him to admit what's really going on.

The room was in darkness except for the faint glow of Tom’s cigarette where he lounged by the open window.	Even his dreams now were faint violins drifting like summer sounds upon the summer air. The room was in darkness except for the faint glow of Tom’s cigarette where he lounged by the open window. As the door shut behind him, Amory stood a moment with his back against it.	The room was dark except for the faint light of Tom's cigarette as he relaxed by the open window.

finally bruised and weary, but still elusive, circling an end, twisting, changing pace, straight-arming.	For those minutes courage flowed like wine out of the November dusk, and he was the eternal hero, one with the sea-rover on the prow of a Norse galley, one with Roland and Horatius, Sir Nigel and Ted Coy, scraped and stripped into trim and then flung by his own will into the breach, beating back the tide, hearing from afar the thunder of cheers. finally bruised and weary, but still elusive, circling an end, twisting, changing pace, straight-arming. falling behind the Groton goal with two men on his legs, in the only touchdown of the game.	Finally, hurt and tired, but still hard to catch, he was running around the edge, twisting, changing speed, and using his arms to push defenders away.

 “Here, Earthborn, over the lilt of the water, Lisping its music and bearing a burden of light, Bosoming day as a laughing and radiant daughter.	“Here, Earthborn, over the lilt of the water, Lisping its music and bearing a burden of light, Bosoming day as a laughing and radiant daughter. Here we may whisper unheard, unafraid of the night.	"Here, child of Earth, by the water's gentle song, whispering its melody and carrying the weight of light, embracing the day like a joyful, bright daughter."

Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead, Till of this flat a mountain you have made, To o’ertop old Pelion, or the skyish head Of blue Olympus.	Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead, Till of this flat a mountain you have made, To o’ertop old Pelion, or the skyish head Of blue Olympus.	Pile your dust on the living and the dead, until you've made a mountain of this plain, taller than Mount Pelion or the peak of Mount Olympus.

So all my words, however true, might sing you to a thousandth June, and no one ever know that you were Beauty for an afternoon.	—Ever his wit and not her eyes, ever his art and not her hair: “Who’d learn a trick in rhyme, be wise and pause before his sonnet there”. So all my words, however true, might sing you to a thousandth June, and no one ever know that you were Beauty for an afternoon. So he wrote one day, when he pondered how coldly we thought of the “Dark Lady of the Sonnets,” and how little we remembered her as the great man wanted her remembered.	So all my words, no matter how honest, could praise you endlessly, but no one would ever realize you were briefly beautiful.

Wilson has only been powerful when he has represented; he’s had to compromise over and over again.	“You’re mistaking this period when every nut is an individualist for a period of individualism. Wilson has only been powerful when he has represented; he’s had to compromise over and over again. Just as soon as Trotsky and Lenin take a definite, consistent stand they’ll become merely two-minute figures like Kerensky.	Wilson was only strong when he acted as a representative; he constantly had to make compromises.

Froggy had fallen twenty-five places in one hour.	“I like you the first twenty-five,” she confessed, her voice trembling, “and Froggy Parker twenty-sixth.” Froggy had fallen twenty-five places in one hour. As yet he had not even noticed it.	Froggy had dropped twenty-five spots in one hour.

Give first admittance to the ambassadors; My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.	Give first admittance to the ambassadors; My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.	Let the ambassadors in first; my news will be the highlight of the celebration.

Ernest Poole and Dorothy Canfield try but they’re hindered by their absolute lack of any sense of humor; but at least they crowd their work instead of spreading it thin.	I believe Rupert Hughes tries to give a real, comprehensive picture of American life, but his style and perspective are barbarous. Ernest Poole and Dorothy Canfield try but they’re hindered by their absolute lack of any sense of humor; but at least they crowd their work instead of spreading it thin. Every author ought to write every book as if he were going to be beheaded the day he finished it.”	Ernest Poole and Dorothy Canfield try, but their complete lack of humor holds them back; however, at least they pack a lot into their work instead of stretching it out.

“He may vary from the disillusioned critic like old Thornton Hancock, all the way to Trotsky.	“Yes,” said Amory. “He may vary from the disillusioned critic like old Thornton Hancock, all the way to Trotsky. Now this spiritually unmarried man hasn’t direct power, for unfortunately the spiritually married man, as a byproduct of his money chase, has garnered in the great newspaper, the popular magazine, the influential weekly—so that Mrs. Newspaper, Mrs. Magazine, Mrs. Weekly can have a better limousine than those oil people across the street or those cement people ’round the corner.”	He could be anything from a cynical complainer like Thornton Hancock to someone radical like Trotsky.

Scurrying back to Minneapolis to see a girl he had known as a child seemed the interesting and romantic thing to do, so without compunction he wired his mother not to expect him.	Amory was in full stride, confident, nervous, and jubilant. Scurrying back to Minneapolis to see a girl he had known as a child seemed the interesting and romantic thing to do, so without compunction he wired his mother not to expect him. sat in the train, and thought about himself for thirty-six hours.	Going back to Minneapolis to see a girl he'd known since childhood seemed interesting and romantic, so he wired his mother without hesitation, telling her not to expect him.

Once a day Amory indulged in a club sandwich, cornflakes, and Julienne potatoes at Joe’s, accompanied usually by Kerry or Alec Connage.	February dripped snow and rain, the cyclonic freshman mid-years passed, and life in 12 Univee continued interesting if not purposeful. Once a day Amory indulged in a club sandwich, cornflakes, and Julienne potatoes at Joe’s, accompanied usually by Kerry or Alec Connage. The latter was a quiet, rather aloof slicker from Hotchkiss, who lived next door and shared the same enforced singleness as Amory, due to the fact that his entire class had gone to Yale.	Every day, Amory treated himself to a club sandwich, cornflakes, and Julienne potatoes at Joe's, usually with Kerry or Alec Connage.

O good Horatio, what a wounded name, Things standing thus unknown, shall live behind me!	As thou’rt a man, Give me the cup: let go; by heaven, I’ll have’t. O good Horatio, what a wounded name, Things standing thus unknown, shall live behind me! If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart, Absent thee from felicity awhile, And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain, To tell my story.	Oh, good Horatio, what a terrible reputation I'll have, with the truth unknown after I'm gone!

“Better drift, like me.	“Why decide?” suggested Kerry. “Better drift, like me. I’m going to sail into prominence on Burne’s coattails.”	Better to drift, like me.

You start as a messenger or a teller, I believe, and from that you go up—almost indefinitely.	I’m sure you would revel in it. You start as a messenger or a teller, I believe, and from that you go up—almost indefinitely. I’m sure if I were a man I’d love the handling of money; it has become quite a senile passion with me.	You begin as a messenger or teller, I think, and from there you can advance almost without limit.

They look like an old man’s home.”	“Burne, I think they’re the ugliest-looking crowd I ever came across. They look like an old man’s home.” “Oh, Amory, look at that forehead on Emerson; look at Tolstoy’s eyes.”	They look like a bunch of old people.

In fact, Beatrice wrote that she was putting the money into railroad and streetcar bonds as fast as she could conveniently transfer it.	The entire residue of the Blaine and O’Hara fortunes consisted of the place at Lake Geneva and approximately a half million dollars, invested now in fairly conservative six-per-cent holdings. In fact, Beatrice wrote that she was putting the money into railroad and streetcar bonds as fast as she could conveniently transfer it. “I am quite sure,” she wrote to Amory, “that if there is one thing we can be positive of, it is that people will not stay in one place.	Beatrice wrote that she was investing the money in railroad and streetcar bonds as quickly as possible.

Then their lips brushed like young wild flowers in the wind.	He had never kissed a girl before, and he tasted his lips curiously, as if he had munched some new fruit. Then their lips brushed like young wild flowers in the wind. “We’re awful,” rejoiced Myra gently.	Their lips touched softly, like wildflowers swaying in the breeze.

Amory saw him about once a week, and together they gilded the ceiling of Tom’s room and decorated the walls with imitation tapestry, bought at an auction, tall candlesticks and figured curtains.	Tom D’Invilliers became at first an occasion rather than a friend. Amory saw him about once a week, and together they gilded the ceiling of Tom’s room and decorated the walls with imitation tapestry, bought at an auction, tall candlesticks and figured curtains. Amory liked him for being clever and literary without effeminacy or affectation.	Amory met with him roughly once a week, and they worked together to decorate Tom's room by painting the ceiling gold, hanging fake tapestries from an auction, and adding tall candlesticks and patterned curtains.

Let's after him, Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome: It is a peerless kinsman.	True, worthy Banquo; he is full so valiant, And in his commendations I am fed; It is a banquet to me. Let's after him, Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome: It is a peerless kinsman.	Let's follow him, since he's already gone ahead to prepare a welcome for us. He's an exceptional relative.

Once a day Amory indulged in a club sandwich, cornflakes, and Julienne potatoes at Joe’s, accompanied usually by Kerry or Alec Connage.	February dripped snow and rain, the cyclonic freshman mid-years passed, and life in 12 Univee continued interesting if not purposeful. Once a day Amory indulged in a club sandwich, cornflakes, and Julienne potatoes at Joe’s, accompanied usually by Kerry or Alec Connage. The latter was a quiet, rather aloof slicker from Hotchkiss, who lived next door and shared the same enforced singleness as Amory, due to the fact that his entire class had gone to Yale.	Amory ate a daily lunch of a club sandwich, cornflakes, and Julienne potatoes at Joe's, usually with Kerry or Alec Connage.

“Turn down this side street, Richard, and drive straight to the Minnehaha Club!”	Myra made out the party ahead, had an instant vision of her mother, and then—alas for convention—glanced into the eyes beside. “Turn down this side street, Richard, and drive straight to the Minnehaha Club!” she cried through the speaking tube.	"Richard, turn onto this side street and take me directly to the Minnehaha Club!"

“I’m rather pagan at present.	“Perhaps,” he assented. “I’m rather pagan at present. It’s just that religion doesn’t seem to have the slightest bearing on life at my age.”	I'm not very religious right now.

The violence of either grief or joy Their own enactures with themselves destroy: Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament; Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.	Most necessary ’tis that we forget To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt: What to ourselves in passion we propose, The passion ending, doth the purpose lose. The violence of either grief or joy Their own enactures with themselves destroy: Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament; Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident. This world is not for aye, nor ’tis not strange That even our loves should with our fortunes change; For ’tis a question left us yet to prove, Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love.	Extreme sadness or happiness ruins the very things they cause: where joy is greatest, sadness is also greatest; sadness rejoices, joy grieves, over minor things.

Why, let the stricken deer go weep, The hart ungalled play; For some must watch, while some must sleep: So runs the world away.	Why, let the stricken deer go weep, The hart ungalled play; For some must watch, while some must sleep: So runs the world away. Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers—if the rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me—with two Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players, sir?	Let the wounded deer go cry, let the unwounded deer play; some must be awake, while others sleep: that's just how the world goes.

He waited on the doorstep with his eyes nonchalantly half-closed, and planned his entrance with precision.	On Thursday, therefore, he walked pensively along the slippery, shovel-scraped sidewalks, and came in sight of Myra’s house, on the half-hour after five, a lateness which he fancied his mother would have favored. He waited on the doorstep with his eyes nonchalantly half-closed, and planned his entrance with precision. He would cross the floor, not too hastily, to Mrs. St. Claire, and say with exactly the correct modulation: “My dear Mrs. St. Claire, I’m frightfully sorry to be late, but my maid”—he paused there and realized he would be quoting—“but my uncle and I had to see a fella—Yes, I’ve met your enchanting daughter at dancing-school.”	He waited on the doorstep, casually half-closing his eyes, and carefully planned how he would enter.

Quick as a flash he turned away, wondering with a touch of panic whether something in the brooding despair of his mood had made a darkness in its tiny soul.	Usually, on nights like this, for there had been many lately, he could escape from this consuming introspection by thinking of children and the infinite possibilities of children—he leaned and listened and he heard a startled baby awake in a house across the street and lend a tiny whimper to the still night. Quick as a flash he turned away, wondering with a touch of panic whether something in the brooding despair of his mood had made a darkness in its tiny soul. He shivered.	He immediately looked away, panicking slightly, wondering if his own dark mood had somehow affected the baby.

No more to wait the twilight of the moon in this sequestered vale of star and spire, for one eternal morning of desire passes to time and earthy afternoon.	The last light fades and drifts across the land—the low, long land, the sunny land of spires; the ghosts of evening tune again their lyres and wander singing in a plaintive band down the long corridors of trees; pale fires echo the night from tower top to tower: Oh, sleep that dreams, and dream that never tires, press from the petals of the lotus flower something of this to keep, the essence of an hour. No more to wait the twilight of the moon in this sequestered vale of star and spire, for one eternal morning of desire passes to time and earthy afternoon. Here, Heraclitus, did you find in fire and shifting things the prophecy you hurled down the dead years; this midnight my desire will see, shadowed among the embers, furled in flame, the splendor and the sadness of the world.	We no longer need to wait for the moon's twilight in this secluded valley of stars and towers, because an endless dawn of longing fades into ordinary time and day.

Spires, against a sky that’s a promise of dawn, and blue light on the slate roofs—it hurts.	“That’s what they are,” Tom tangented off, “deep blue—a bit of color would spoil them, make them exotic. Spires, against a sky that’s a promise of dawn, and blue light on the slate roofs—it hurts. rather—” “Goodbye, Aaron Burr,” Amory called toward deserted Nassau Hall, “you and I knew strange corners of life.”	The church spires against the sky that looks like dawn is coming, and the blue light on the roofs—it's painful to look at.

What, the fair Ophelia!	What, the fair Ophelia!	What, beautiful Ophelia!

What's the business, That such a hideous trumpet calls to parley The sleepers of the house?	What's the business, That such a hideous trumpet calls to parley The sleepers of the house? speak, speak!	What's going on? Why is that awful trumpet blasting and waking everyone in the house?

ah fie! ’tis an unweeded garden, That grows to seed; things rank and gross in nature	Fie on’t! ah fie! ’tis an unweeded garden, That grows to seed; things rank and gross in nature Possess it merely.	Oh, shame! It's like an overgrown garden, gone to seed; only corrupt and wild things grow there.

It was like weakness in a good woman, or blood on satin; one of those terrible incongruities that shake little things in the back of the brain.	with a sort of wrongness that he felt rather than knew. It was like weakness in a good woman, or blood on satin; one of those terrible incongruities that shake little things in the back of the brain. He wore no shoes, but, instead, a sort of half moccasin, pointed, though, like the shoes they wore in the fourteenth century, and with the little ends curling up.	It felt like a flaw in something beautiful, like a good woman being weak or blood staining satin; a jarring contrast that unsettles you deep down.

Gonzago is the duke’s name; his wife, Baptista: you shall see anon; ’tis a knavish piece of work: but what o’ that?	This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna: Gonzago is the duke’s name; his wife, Baptista: you shall see anon; ’tis a knavish piece of work: but what o’ that? your majesty and we that have free souls, it touches us not: let the galled jade wince, our withers are unwrung.	Gonzago is the duke's name, and his wife is Baptista. You'll see them soon. It's a dishonest play, but so what?

With visitors from Ivy and Cottage and Tiger Inn he played the “nice, unspoilt, ingenuous boy” very much at ease and quite unaware of the object of the call.	“Oh, let me see—” he said one night to a flabbergasted delegation, “what club do you represent?” With visitors from Ivy and Cottage and Tiger Inn he played the “nice, unspoilt, ingenuous boy” very much at ease and quite unaware of the object of the call. When the fatal morning arrived, early in March, and the campus became a document in hysteria, he slid smoothly into Cottage with Alec Connage and watched his suddenly neurotic class with much wonder.	When visitors from Ivy, Cottage, and Tiger Inn came, he acted like a naive and innocent boy, appearing relaxed and clueless about why they were there.

“Just the same, I can only cut six more classes, with over a month and a half to go.”	“One of the days is the Sabbath.” “Just the same, I can only cut six more classes, with over a month and a half to go.” “Throw him out!”	"Still, I can only skip six more classes, and there's still a month and a half left."

This, it seemed, usually aroused the jealous suspicions of the next borrower.	Finally he could borrow no more rings, owing to his nervous habit of chewing them out of shape. This, it seemed, usually aroused the jealous suspicions of the next borrower. All through the summer months Amory and Frog Parker went each week to the Stock Company.	This usually made the next person he borrowed from suspicious and jealous.

“You two order; Phoebe and I are going to shake a wicked calf,” and they sailed off in the muddled crowd.	shouted Sloane. “You two order; Phoebe and I are going to shake a wicked calf,” and they sailed off in the muddled crowd. Axia and Amory, acquaintances of an hour, jostled behind a waiter to a table at a point of vantage; there they took seats and watched.	"You two order; Phoebe and I are going to dance," and they disappeared into the crowded room.

Fled to England!	Fled to England!	Fled to England!

“No—I’m through—as far as ever being a power in college is concerned.”	“Of course, with a little effort you could still stage a comeback.” “No—I’m through—as far as ever being a power in college is concerned.” “But, Amory, honestly, what makes me the angriest isn’t the fact that you won’t be chairman of the Prince and on the Senior Council, but just that you didn’t get down and pass that exam.”	"No, I'm done, I'll never be influential in college again."

a harsh phrase from the lips of an older boy (older boys usually detested him) was liable to sweep him off his poise into surly sensitiveness, or timid stupidity.	There was, also, a curious strain of weakness running crosswise through his makeup. a harsh phrase from the lips of an older boy (older boys usually detested him) was liable to sweep him off his poise into surly sensitiveness, or timid stupidity. he was a slave to his own moods and he felt that though he was capable of recklessness and audacity, he possessed neither courage, perseverance, nor self-respect.	A mean comment from an older boy (who usually disliked him anyway) could easily make him lose his composure and become either sulky and defensive or shy and foolish.

Somehow the quiet Humbird, and Sloane, with his impatient superciliousness, were the centre.	Alec and Kerry were the life of it, but not quite the centre. Somehow the quiet Humbird, and Sloane, with his impatient superciliousness, were the centre. Dick Humbird had, ever since freshman year, seemed to Amory a perfect type of aristocrat.	Somehow, the quiet Humbird and Sloane, with his impatient arrogance, were the main focus.

Olson walked through the bathroom and took a cursory glance at Alec’s still form.	We don’t need a valedictory.” Olson walked through the bathroom and took a cursory glance at Alec’s still form. Then he extinguished the lights and motioned them to follow him.	Olson walked through the bathroom and quickly looked at Alec, who was still lying there.

and I will still shout our futilities to each other across the stage until the last silly curtain falls plump!	But men will chatter and you and I will still shout our futilities to each other across the stage until the last silly curtain falls plump! upon our bobbing heads.	I'll still shout nonsense to you on stage until the curtain finally falls!

“When I had my last breakdown”—she spoke of it as a sturdy, gallant feat.	“Did you, Beatrice?” “When I had my last breakdown”—she spoke of it as a sturdy, gallant feat. “The doctors told me”—her voice sang on a confidential note—“that if any man alive had done the consistent drinking that I have, he would have been physically shattered, my dear, and in his grave—long in his grave.”	"When I had my last breakdown"—she talked about it like it was a brave and impressive achievement.

Her goodness was above the prosy morals of the husband-seeker, apart from the dull literature of female virtue.	Amory wasn’t good enough for Clara, Clara of ripply golden hair, but then no man was. Her goodness was above the prosy morals of the husband-seeker, apart from the dull literature of female virtue. Sorrow lay lightly around her, and when Amory found her in Philadelphia he thought her steely blue eyes held only happiness; a latent strength, a realism, was brought to its fullest development by the facts that she was compelled to face.	She was good in a way that had nothing to do with the boring rules about how women should act to find a husband.

for from broad words and 'cause he fail'd His presence at the tyrant's feast, I hear Macduff lives in disgrace: sir, can you tell Where he bestows himself?	But, peace! for from broad words and 'cause he fail'd His presence at the tyrant's feast, I hear Macduff lives in disgrace: sir, can you tell Where he bestows himself?	Because of his outspoken words and because he missed the tyrant's feast, I hear Macduff is out of favor. Sir, can you tell me where he is staying?

There the man half sat, half leaned against a pile of pillows on the corner divan.	That was all; for at the second that his decision came, he looked up and saw, ten yards from him, the man who had been in the café, and with his jump of astonishment the glass fell from his uplifted hand. There the man half sat, half leaned against a pile of pillows on the corner divan. His face was cast in the same yellow wax as in the café, neither the dull, pasty color of a dead man—rather a sort of virile pallor—nor unhealthy, you’d have called it; but like a strong man who’d worked in a mine or done night shifts in a damp climate.	The man was sitting and leaning against a stack of pillows on the corner couch.

Yet all thought usually reached the public after thirty years in some such form: Benson and Chesterton had popularized Huysmans and Newman; Shaw had sugarcoated Nietzsche and Ibsen and Schopenhauer.	They were too easy, too dangerous to the public mind. Yet all thought usually reached the public after thirty years in some such form: Benson and Chesterton had popularized Huysmans and Newman; Shaw had sugarcoated Nietzsche and Ibsen and Schopenhauer. The man in the street heard the conclusions of dead genius through someone else’s clever paradoxes and didactic epigrams.	However, new ideas typically reached the public after about thirty years, often because writers like Benson and Chesterton made Huysmans and Newman popular, and Shaw simplified complex thinkers like Nietzsche, Ibsen, and Schopenhauer.

Give me your favour: my dull brain was wrought With things forgotten.	Give me your favour: my dull brain was wrought With things forgotten. Kind gentlemen, your pains Are register'd where every day I turn The leaf to read them.	Please forgive me: my memory is bad and filled with things I've forgotten.

She was accustomed to be thus followed by her desperate past, and it never failed to rouse in her the same feeling of resentment; yet—in a strange town it was an advantageous reputation.	At this Isabelle’s little fist had clinched suddenly under the fur robe. She was accustomed to be thus followed by her desperate past, and it never failed to rouse in her the same feeling of resentment; yet—in a strange town it was an advantageous reputation. She was a “Speed,” was she?	She was used to her troubled past catching up with her, and it always made her angry. But in a new town, having that kind of reputation could actually be helpful.

Double, double toil and trouble; Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.	Double, double toil and trouble; Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.	Double, double, work and trouble; Fire burn and cauldron bubble.

Mackenzie, Chesterton, Galsworthy, Bennett, had sunk in his appreciation from sagacious, life-saturated geniuses to merely diverting contemporaries.	Vandover and the Brute, The Damnation of Theron Ware, and Jennie Gerhardt. Mackenzie, Chesterton, Galsworthy, Bennett, had sunk in his appreciation from sagacious, life-saturated geniuses to merely diverting contemporaries. Shaw’s aloof clarity and brilliant consistency and the gloriously intoxicated efforts of H. G. Wells to fit the key of romantic symmetry into the elusive lock of truth, alone won his rapt attention.	Mackenzie, Chesterton, Galsworthy, and Bennett, whom he once saw as wise and insightful geniuses, he now just considered entertaining writers of his time.

He thought back through two years, of Burne as a hurried, nervous freshman, quite submerged in his brother’s personality.	here were other possible clay feet. He thought back through two years, of Burne as a hurried, nervous freshman, quite submerged in his brother’s personality. Then he remembered an incident of sophomore year, in which Burne had been suspected of the leading role.	He recalled two years, remembering Burne as a rushed, anxious freshman who was overshadowed by his brother.

I will not be afraid of death and bane, Till Birnam forest come to Dunsinane.	Bring it after me. I will not be afraid of death and bane, Till Birnam forest come to Dunsinane.	I won't be afraid of death or destruction until Birnam Wood moves to Dunsinane.

Quick as a flash he turned away, wondering with a touch of panic whether something in the brooding despair of his mood had made a darkness in its tiny soul.	Usually, on nights like this, for there had been many lately, he could escape from this consuming introspection by thinking of children and the infinite possibilities of children—he leaned and listened and he heard a startled baby awake in a house across the street and lend a tiny whimper to the still night. Quick as a flash he turned away, wondering with a touch of panic whether something in the brooding despair of his mood had made a darkness in its tiny soul. He shivered.	He turned away immediately, a little panicked, wondering if his own dark mood had somehow affected the baby.

“Here you are, Juan,” cried she of the damp hair.	He followed directions and as he sprawled up the side, knee-deep in hay, a small, white hand reached out, gripped his, and helped him onto the top. “Here you are, Juan,” cried she of the damp hair. “Do you mind if I drop the Don?”	"Here you are, Juan," called out the girl with the wet hair.

Please't your highness To grace us with your royal company.	His absence, sir, Lays blame upon his promise. Please't your highness To grace us with your royal company.	Please honor us with your presence, your highness.

He stretched out his arms to the crystalline, radiant sky.	And he could not tell why the struggle was worth while, why he had determined to use to the utmost himself and his heritage from the personalities he had passed. He stretched out his arms to the crystalline, radiant sky. “I know myself,” he cried, “but that is all.”	He reached his arms out toward the clear, bright sky.

whose phrase of sorrow Conjures the wandering stars, and makes them stand Like wonder-wounded hearers?	What is he whose grief Bears such an emphasis? whose phrase of sorrow Conjures the wandering stars, and makes them stand Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I, Hamlet the Dane.	whose words of grief summon the roaming stars and make them stop like listeners struck with wonder?

Casey-Jones—mounted to the cab-un Took his farewell journey to the promised land.”	The sound of the graphophone mingled with the voices of many girls humming the air, and a faint glow was born and spread over him: “Casey-Jones—mounted to the cab-un Casey-Jones—’th his orders in his hand. Casey-Jones—mounted to the cab-un Took his farewell journey to the promised land.”	Casey Jones climbed into the cab, starting his last ride to heaven.

By the great commercializing of printing you’ve found a harmless, polite occupation for every genius who might have carved his own niche.	Artists draw your magazine covers, write your advertisements, hash out ragtime for your theatres. By the great commercializing of printing you’ve found a harmless, polite occupation for every genius who might have carved his own niche. But beware the artist who’s an intellectual also.	Mass printing has given you a safe, respectable job for every talented person who might have otherwise made their own unique mark.

I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late innovation.	I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late innovation.	I think their hesitation is due to the recent change.

“Oh, golly, Tom!”	He felt the quiver of a tear on his eyelid. “Oh, golly, Tom!”	"Oh, Tom!"

On the return he launched into a discussion of will.	“Well,” Burne said suddenly, after a few moments’ silence, “we’re halfway through, let’s turn back.” On the return he launched into a discussion of will. “It’s the whole thing,” he asserted.	On the way back, he started talking about willpower.

She works in a Jam Factoree And—that-may-be-all-right	“Oh-h-h-h-h She works in a Jam Factoree And—that-may-be-all-right But you can’t-fool-me For I know—damn—well That she don’t-make-jam-all-night!	She works in a jam factory, and that might be okay.

She had once been a Catholic, but discovering that priests were infinitely more attentive when she was in process of losing or regaining faith in Mother Church, she maintained an enchantingly wavering attitude.	She became almost incoherent—“Suppose—time in every Western woman’s life—she feels her husband is prosperous enough for her to have—accent—they try to impress me, my dear—” Though she thought of her body as a mass of frailties, she considered her soul quite as ill, and therefore important in her life. She had once been a Catholic, but discovering that priests were infinitely more attentive when she was in process of losing or regaining faith in Mother Church, she maintained an enchantingly wavering attitude. Often she deplored the bourgeois quality of the American Catholic clergy, and was quite sure that had she lived in the shadow of the great Continental cathedrals her soul would still be a thin flame on the mighty altar of Rome.	She used to be Catholic, but when she realized priests paid more attention to her when she was questioning or returning to the Church, she kept her faith deliberately uncertain and charmingly unstable.

or is it a fee-grief Due to some single breast?	The general cause? or is it a fee-grief Due to some single breast?	Or is it a personal sorrow affecting one person?

For the first time he came into actual cognizance of the family finances, and realized what a tidy fortune had once been under his father’s management.	What interested him much more than the final departure of his father from things mundane was a tri-cornered conversation between Beatrice, Mr. Barton, of Barton and Krogman, their lawyers, and himself, that took place several days after the funeral. For the first time he came into actual cognizance of the family finances, and realized what a tidy fortune had once been under his father’s management. He took a ledger labelled “1906” and ran through it rather carefully.	For the first time, he really understood the family's money situation and how much wealth his father had once controlled.

They had bought flaring suits with huge peg-top trousers and gigantic padded shoulders.	There were Burne and Fred Sloane arrayed to the last dot like the lurid figures on college posters. They had bought flaring suits with huge peg-top trousers and gigantic padded shoulders. On their heads were rakish college hats, pinned up in front and sporting bright orange-and-black bands, while from their celluloid collars blossomed flaming orange ties.	They bought flashy suits with wide-legged pants and enormous padded shoulders.

He sat in the big chair and held out his arms so that she could nestle inside them.	“Sit like we do,” she whispered. He sat in the big chair and held out his arms so that she could nestle inside them. “I knew you’d come tonight,” she said softly, “like summer, just when I needed you most.	He sat in the big chair and opened his arms so she could snuggle close.

But I love you—or adore you—or worship you—” “There you go—running through your catalogue of emotions in five seconds.”	“I didn’t feel as though I were speaking aloud. But I love you—or adore you—or worship you—” “There you go—running through your catalogue of emotions in five seconds.” He smiled unwillingly.	But I love you—or adore you—or worship you—" "There you go—listing all your feelings in five seconds."

In self-reproach and loneliness and disillusion he came to the entrance of the labyrinth.	He was his own best example—sitting in the rain, a human creature of sex and pride, foiled by chance and his own temperament of the balm of love and children, preserved to help in building up the living consciousness of the race. In self-reproach and loneliness and disillusion he came to the entrance of the labyrinth. Another dawn flung itself across the river, a belated taxi hurried along the street, its lamps still shining like burning eyes in a face white from a night’s carouse.	Filled with self-pity, loneliness, and disappointment, he arrived at the beginning of his confusing journey.

They curved tantalizingly, and she could catch just a glimpse of two pairs of masculine feet in the hall below.	Isabelle started toward the dressing-room for a last peek in the mirror, but something decided her to stand there and gaze down the broad stairs of the Minnehaha Club. They curved tantalizingly, and she could catch just a glimpse of two pairs of masculine feet in the hall below. Pump-shod in uniform black, they gave no hint of identity, but she wondered eagerly if one pair were attached to Amory Blaine.	The stairs curved in an enticing way, and she could just see two pairs of men's feet in the hall downstairs.

For the first time in his life he rather longed for death to roll over his generation, obliterating their petty fevers and struggles and exultations.	He was in an eddy again, a deep, lethargic gulf, without desire to work or write, love or dissipate. For the first time in his life he rather longed for death to roll over his generation, obliterating their petty fevers and struggles and exultations. His youth seemed never so vanished as now in the contrast between the utter loneliness of this visit and that riotous, joyful party of four years before.	For the first time, he almost wanted death to wipe out everyone his age, ending their silly problems, fights, and triumphs.

And, sometimes, even chapel lures That conscious tolerance of yours, That broad and beaming view of truth (Including Kant and General Booth.)	A radical comes down and shocks The atheistic orthodox?– You’re representing Common Sense, Mouth open, in the audience. And, sometimes, even chapel lures That conscious tolerance of yours, That broad and beaming view of truth (Including Kant and General Booth.) And so from shock to shock you live, A hollow, pale affirmative.	And sometimes, even church attracts your open-mindedness, your wide and bright view of truth (which includes both Kant and General Booth).

They were a darkish brown and his toes seemed to fill them to the end.	He wore no shoes, but, instead, a sort of half moccasin, pointed, though, like the shoes they wore in the fourteenth century, and with the little ends curling up. They were a darkish brown and his toes seemed to fill them to the end. They were unutterably terrible.	They were a brownish color, and his toes looked like they completely filled them.

Somehow the quiet Humbird, and Sloane, with his impatient superciliousness, were the centre.	Alec and Kerry were the life of it, but not quite the centre. Somehow the quiet Humbird, and Sloane, with his impatient superciliousness, were the centre. Dick Humbird had, ever since freshman year, seemed to Amory a perfect type of aristocrat.	Somehow, the quiet Humbird and Sloane, with his impatient arrogance, were the focus.

“Listen to the beat of our horses’ hoofs—‘tump-tump-tump-a-tump.’	“The end of summer,” said Eleanor softly. “Listen to the beat of our horses’ hoofs—‘tump-tump-tump-a-tump.’ Have you ever been feverish and had all noises divide into ‘tump-tump-tump’ until you could swear eternity was divisible into so many tumps?	"Listen to the sound of our horses' hooves—'thump-thump-thump-a-thump.'"

“There’s always a bunch of shy fellas,” he commented, “sitting at the tail of the bob, sorta lurkin’ an’ whisperin’ an’ pushin’ each other off.	Now they talked for a moment about bobbing parties. “There’s always a bunch of shy fellas,” he commented, “sitting at the tail of the bob, sorta lurkin’ an’ whisperin’ an’ pushin’ each other off. Then there’s always some crazy cross-eyed girl”—he gave a terrifying imitation—“she’s always talkin’ hard, sorta, to the chaperon.”	"There are always a group of shy guys," he said, "sitting at the back, kind of sneaking around, whispering, and pushing each other."

Amory winced, and wondered how this would have sounded to Froggy Parker.	“The doctors told me”—her voice sang on a confidential note—“that if any man alive had done the consistent drinking that I have, he would have been physically shattered, my dear, and in his grave—long in his grave.” Amory winced, and wondered how this would have sounded to Froggy Parker. “Yes,” continued Beatrice tragically, “I had dreams—wonderful visions.”	Amory cringed and wondered what Froggy Parker would have thought of that.

That it might please you to give quiet pass Through your dominions for this enterprise, On such regards of safety and allowance As therein are set down.	Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy, Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee, And his commission to employ those soldiers, So levied as before, against the Polack: With an entreaty, (Giving a paper.) That it might please you to give quiet pass Through your dominions for this enterprise, On such regards of safety and allowance As therein are set down.	Asking you to please allow them safe passage through your lands for this mission, following the safety measures and conditions written here.

He had never kissed a girl before, and he tasted his lips curiously, as if he had munched some new fruit.	But Amory, being on the spot, leaned over quickly and kissed Myra’s cheek. He had never kissed a girl before, and he tasted his lips curiously, as if he had munched some new fruit. Then their lips brushed like young wild flowers in the wind.	He'd never kissed a girl, and he tasted his lips, wondering what it was like, as if he'd just eaten some new fruit.

Here’s the old jitney waiter.	“Oh, he’s all right. Here’s the old jitney waiter. If you ask me, I want a double Daiquiri.”	Here's the cheap waiter.

Look, how she rubs her hands.	What is it she does now? Look, how she rubs her hands.	Look at how she's rubbing her hands.

When he ceased the little man spoke up with a determined nod, as if resolved this time to have his say out.	Men won’t work for blue ribbons, that’s all rot.” When he ceased the little man spoke up with a determined nod, as if resolved this time to have his say out. “There are certain things which are human nature,” he asserted with an owl-like look, “which always have been and always will be, which can’t be changed.”	When he stopped, the little man spoke up, nodding firmly, as if determined to finally say what he thought.

For a delicious hour that passed too soon they glided the silent roads about Princeton and talked from the surface of their hearts in shy excitement.	It delighted Amory when Isabelle suggested that they leave for a while and drive around in her car. For a delicious hour that passed too soon they glided the silent roads about Princeton and talked from the surface of their hearts in shy excitement. Amory felt strangely ingenuous and made no attempt to kiss her.	They spent a wonderful, all-too-brief hour driving around the quiet roads near Princeton, talking with shy excitement and sharing their true feelings.

Maybe I’ll play—but Rosalind was the only girl in the wide world that could have held me.”	If I thought there’d be another I’d lose my remaining faith in human nature. Maybe I’ll play—but Rosalind was the only girl in the wide world that could have held me.” “Well,” yawned Tom, “I’ve played confidant a good hour by the clock.	Maybe I'll date, but Rosalind was the only girl in the world who ever truly captivated me.

Thou art the best o' the cut-throats: yet he's good That did the like for Fleance:	Thou art the best o' the cut-throats: yet he's good That did the like for Fleance: if thou didst it, Thou art the nonpareil.	You're the best of the murderers, but the one who did the same for Fleance is also good.

From the Country Club steps the roads stretched away, dark creases on the white blanket; huge heaps of snow lining the sides like the tracks of giant moles.	Overhead the sky was half crystalline, half misty, and the night around was chill and vibrant with rich tension. From the Country Club steps the roads stretched away, dark creases on the white blanket; huge heaps of snow lining the sides like the tracks of giant moles. They lingered for a moment on the steps, and watched the white holiday moon.	From the Country Club steps, the roads looked like dark lines on the white snow; big piles of snow lined the sides, looking like tracks left by giant moles.

I hope we have reformed that indifferently with us, sir.	I hope we have reformed that indifferently with us, sir.	I hope we've improved that lackluster situation with us, sir.

They rejoiced, for she was a brave raconteuse, but many were the keys turned in sideboard locks that night against the possible defection of little Bobby or Barbara.	Her hand was radiantly outlined against her beautiful bosom; then sinking her voice to a whisper, she told them of the apricot cordial. They rejoiced, for she was a brave raconteuse, but many were the keys turned in sideboard locks that night against the possible defection of little Bobby or Barbara. These domestic pilgrimages were invariably in state; two maids, the private car, or Mr. Blaine when available, and very often a physician.	They were happy to hear the story because she was a good storyteller, but many people locked away the apricot cordial that night to keep Bobby or Barbara from sneaking a taste.

Ay, my lord, and of calf-skins too.	Ay, my lord, and of calf-skins too.	Yes, my lord, and made of calfskin too.

Quite conceivably it was an empty ritual but it was seemingly the only assimilative, traditionary bulwark against the decay of morals.	The idea was strong in him that there was a certain intrinsic lack in those to whom orthodox religion was necessary, and religion to Amory meant the Church of Rome. Quite conceivably it was an empty ritual but it was seemingly the only assimilative, traditionary bulwark against the decay of morals. Until the great mobs could be educated into a moral sense someone must cry: “Thou shalt not!”	It might be a meaningless ritual, but it seemed like the only way to maintain morals through tradition.

By the pricking of my thumbs, Something wicked this way comes.	By the pricking of my thumbs, Something wicked this way comes. Open, locks, Whoever knocks!	I feel it in my bones, something bad is coming.

What, quite unmann'd in folly?	What, quite unmann'd in folly?	What, completely overcome by foolishness?

I'll see no more: And yet the eighth appears, who bears a glass Which shows me many more; and some I see That two-fold balls and treble scepters carry: Horrible sight!	A seventh! I'll see no more: And yet the eighth appears, who bears a glass Which shows me many more; and some I see That two-fold balls and treble scepters carry: Horrible sight! Now, I see, 'tis true; For the blood-bolter'd Banquo smiles upon me, And points at them for his.	I don't want to see any more! But now the eighth one appears, holding a mirror that shows me even more of them; and I see some who carry double orbs and triple scepters: A horrible sight!

It was a mumbling of men’s voices and a repeated muffled rapping.	Then his ears caught a louder sound from somewhere along the corridor outside. It was a mumbling of men’s voices and a repeated muffled rapping. Amory threw off the blankets and moved close to the bathroom door.	It was the sound of men's voices, mumbling, and a muffled knocking, repeated over and over.

Madam, how like you this play?	Madam, how like you this play?	Madam, how do you like this play?

O gentle lady, 'Tis not for you to hear what I can speak: The repetition, in a woman's ear, Would murder as it fell.	O gentle lady, 'Tis not for you to hear what I can speak: The repetition, in a woman's ear, Would murder as it fell. O Banquo, Banquo, Our royal master 's murder'd!	Oh, kind lady, you shouldn't hear what I have to say: repeating it to a woman would be devastating.

“But who, O, who had seen the mobled queen—”	“But who, O, who had seen the mobled queen—”	But who, oh who, had seen the muffled queen—

