sub_sentence

done, When the battle's lost and won.

Hover through the fog and filthy air.

the fog and filthy air

report, As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt The newest state.

a good and hardy soldier

knowledge of the broil As thou didst leave it.

cling together And choke their art.

two spent swimmers

from the western isles Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied

And fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling

his damned quarrel

his brandish'd steel

carved out his passage Till he faced the slave;

valour's minion

bade farewell to him, Till he unseam'd him from the nave to the chaps, And fix'd his head upon our battlements.

direful thunders break

reflection Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break, So from that spring whence comfort seem'd to come Discomfort swells.

Shipwrecking storms

valour arm'd

the Norweyan lord surveying vantage

these skipping kerns

furbish'd arms

captains, Macbeth and Banquo?

hare the lion.

say sooth, I must report they were As cannons overcharged with double cracks, so they Doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe: Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds, Or memorise another Golgotha, I cannot tell.

thee as thy wounds; They smack of honour both.

What a haste

Whence camest thou

Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky And fan our people cold.

a dismal conflict

Confronted him with self-comparisons, Point against point rebellious, arm 'gainst arm.

his lavish spirit

disbursed at Saint Colme's inch Ten thousand dollars to our general use.

go pronounce his present death, And with his former title greet Macbeth.

Our bosom interest

Aroint thee, witch!

the rump-fed ronyon cries

rat without a tail, I'll do, I'll do, and I'll do.

Thou'rt kind

ports they blow, All the quarters that they know I' the shipman's card.

I' the shipman's card

dry as hay: Sleep shall neither night nor day Hang upon his pent-house lid; He shall live a man forbid:

Weary se'nnights

Yet it shall be tempest-tost.

hand in hand, Posters of the sea and land, Thus do go about, about: Thrice to thine and thrice to mine And thrice again, to make up nine.

the charm's wound

wild in their attire, That look not like the inhabitants o' the earth, And yet are on't?

You should be women, And yet your beards forbid me to interpret That you are so.

her chappy finger

hail, Macbeth, thou shalt be king hereafter!

sir, why do you start; and seem to fear Things that do sound so fair?

I' the name of truth, Are ye fantastical, or that indeed Which outwardly ye show?

Speak then to me, who neither beg nor fear Your favours nor your hate.

get kings, though thou be none: So all hail, Macbeth and Banquo!

The thane of Cawdor lives, A prosperous gentleman; and to be king Stands not within the prospect of belief, No more than to be Cawdor.

Why you stop our way With such prophetic greeting?

the insane root that takes the reason prisoner?

the selfsame tune

Macbeth, The news of thy success; and when he reads Thy personal venture in the rebels' fight, His wonders and his praises do contend Which should be thine or his: silenced with that,

the selfsame day

finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks, Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make, Strange images of death.

Nothing afeard

pour'd them down before him.

herald thee into his sight, Not pay thee.

earnest of a greater honour, He bade me, from him, call thee thane of Cawdor: In which addition, hail, most worthy thane!

his country's wreck

enkindle you unto the crown, Besides the thane of Cawdor.

Win us with honest trifles, to betray's In deepest consequence.

prologues to the swelling act Of the imperial theme.—I thank you, gentlemen.

I feel my heart knock at my ribs, Against the use of nature?

thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical, Shakes so my single state of man that function Is smother'd in surmise, and nothing is But what is not.

Think upon what hath chanced, and, at more time, The interim having weigh'd it, let us speak Our free hearts each to other.

a careless trifle

A deep repentance

twere a careless trifle.

hold thee to my heart.

My plenteous joys

eldest, Malcolm, whom we name hereafter The Prince of Cumberland; which honour must Not unaccompanied invest him only, But signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine On all deservers.

I'll be myself the harbinger and make joyful The hearing of my wife with your approach; So humbly take my leave.

fall down, or else o'erleap, For in my way it lies.

a peerless kinsman

wonder of it, came missives from the king, who all-hailed me 'Thane of Cawdor;' by which title, before, these weird sisters saluted me, and referred me to the coming on of time, with 'Hail, king that shalt be!'

deliver thee, my dearest partner of greatness, that thou mightst not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being ignorant of what greatness is promised thee.

Lay it to thy heart, and farewell.'

cries 'Thus thou must do, if thou have it; And that which rather thou dost fear to do Than wishest should be undone.'

chastise with the valour of my tongue All that impedes thee from the golden round,

metaphysical aid

were't

have inform'd for preparation.

direst cruelty

spirits That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here, And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full Of direst cruelty!

the dunnest smoke

pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell, That my keen knife see not the wound it makes, Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark, To cry 'Hold, hold!'

look like the innocent flower, But be the serpent under't.

shall to all our nights and days to come Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.

solely sovereign sway

his loved mansionry

his pendent bed and procreant cradle

The temple-haunting martlet

coign of vantage, but this bird Hath made his pendent bed and procreant cradle: Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed, The air is delicate.

no jutty, frieze

bid God 'ild us for your pains, And thank us for your trouble.

And the late dignities heap'd up to them, We rest your hermits.

make their audit at your highness' pleasure, Still to return your own.

his surcease success

if the assassination Could trammel up the consequence, and catch With his surcease success; that but this blow Might be the be-all and the end-all here, But here, upon this bank and shoal of time, We'ld jump the life to come.

our poison'd chalice

instructions, which, being taught, return To plague the inventor: this even-handed justice Commends the ingredients of our poison'd chalice To our own lips.

I a am his kinsman and his subject, Strong both against the deed; then, as his host, Who should against his murderer shut the door, Not bear the knife myself.

blow the horrid deed in every eye, That tears shall drown the wind.

the horrid deed

ambition, which o'erleaps itself And falls on the other.

only Vaulting ambition

almost supp'd

ask'd for me?

opinions from all sorts of people, Which would be worn now in their newest gloss, Not cast aside so soon.

thine own act

same in thine own act and valour As thou art in desire?

thine own esteem

Letting 'I dare not' wait upon 'I would,' Like the poor cat i' the adage?

Their drenched natures

his two chamberlains

when in swinish sleep

who shall bear the guilt Of our great quell?

thy undaunted mettle

As we shall make our griefs and clamour roar Upon his death?

fairest show: False face must hide what the false heart doth know.

And yet I would not sleep: merciful powers, Restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature Gives way to in repose!

A heavy summons

became the servant to defect; Which else should free have wrought.

your kind'st leisure

cleave to my consent, when 'tis, It shall make honour for you.

lose none In seeking to augment it, but still keep My bosom franchised and allegiance clear, I shall be counsell'd.

dudgeon gouts

The curtain'd sleep

his stealthy pace

Tarquin's ravishing strides

take the present horror from the time, Which now suits with it.

Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.

summons thee to heaven or to hell.

That which hath made them drunk hath made me bold; What hath quench'd them hath given me fire.

the fatal bellman, Which gives the stern'st good-night.

the surfeited grooms

mock their charge with snores: I have drugg'd their possets, That death and nature do contend about them, Whether they live or die.

sore labour's bath

the ravell'd sleeve

The king hath murder'd sleep, and therefore Cawdor Shall sleep no more; Macbeth shall sleep no more.'

unbend your noble strength, to think So brainsickly of things.

Go get some water, And wash this filthy witness from your hand.

this filthy witness

Infirm of purpose!

Like eye of childhood That fears a painted devil.

faces of the grooms withal; For it must seem their guilt.

knocking At the south entry: retire we to our chamber; A little water clears us of this deed: How easy is it, then!

constancy Hath left you unattended.

Get on your nightgown, lest occasion call us, And show us to be watchers.

twere best not know myself.

Wake Duncan with thy knocking!

enow about you; here you'll sweat for't.

who committed treason enough for God's sake, yet could not equivocate to heaven: O, come in, equivocator.

come hither, for stealing out of a French hose: come in, tailor; here you may roast your goose.

go the primrose way to the everlasting bonfire.

the primrose way

Anon, anon!

in conclusion, equivocates him in a sleep, and, giving him the lie, leaves him.

though he took up my legs sometime, yet I made a shift to cast him.

morrow, noble sir.

call timely on him: I have almost slipp'd the hour.

it may seem a joyful trouble to you; But yet 'tis one.

the woeful time

dire combustion

bird Clamour'd the livelong night: some say, the earth Was feverous and did shake.

The Lord's anointed temple

destroy your sight With a new Gorgon: do not bid me speak; See, and then speak yourselves.

the alarum-bell

As from your graves rise up, and walk like sprites, To countenance this horror!

Who calls to parley The sleepers of the house?

The repetition, in a woman's ear, Would murder as it fell.

Our royal master 's murder'd

Duff, I prithee, contradict thyself, And say it is not so.

the mere lees

All is but toys: renown and grace is dead; The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees Is left this vault to brag of.

The fountain of your blood Is stopp'd; the very source of it is stopp'd.

Those of his chamber, as it seem'd, had done 't: Their hands and faces were an badged with blood; So were their daggers, which unwiped we found Upon their pillows: They stared, and were distracted; no man's life Was to be trusted with them.

I repent me of my fury, That I did kill them.

how can one be wise, amazed, temperate and furious, Loyal and neutral, in a moment?

my violent love Outrun the pauser, reason.

look'd like a breach in nature For ruin's wasteful entrance: there, the murderers, Steep'd in the colours of their trade, their daggers Unmannerly breech'd with gore: who could refrain, That had a heart to love, and in that heart Courage to make 's love kno wn?

his gash'd stabs

an auger-hole

Hid in an auger-hole, may rush, and seize us?

suffer in exposure, let us meet, And question this most bloody piece of work, To know it further.

our naked frailties

keep us both the safer: where we are, There's daggers in men's smiles: the near in blood, The nearer bloody.

This murderous shaft

dainty of leave-taking, But shift away: there's warrant in that theft Which steals itself, when there's no mercy left.

remember well: Within the volume of which time I have seen Hours dreadful and things strange; but this sore night Hath trifled former knowings.

Why does the face of earth entomb, When living light should kiss it?

a mousing owl

falcon, towering in her pride of place, Was by a mousing owl hawk'd at and kill'd.

flung out, Contending 'gainst obedience, as they would make War with mankind.

bloody deed

Is't known who did this more than bloody deed?

Those that Macbeth hath slain.

Thriftless ambition

ambition, that wilt ravin up Thine own life's means!

The sacred storehouse

Will you to Scone?

I'll to Fife.

God's benison

As the weird women promised, and, I fear, Thou play'dst most foully for't: yet it was said It should not stand in thy posterity, But that myself should be the root and father Of many kings.

thy posterity

Thou play'dst most foully for't

borrower of the night For a dark hour or twain.

confessing Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers With strange invention: but of that to-morrow, When therewithal we shall have cause of state Craving us jointly.

Hie you

our time does call upon 's.

We'll keep ourself Till supper-time alone: while then, God be with you!

Sirrah, a word with you: attend those men Our pleasure?

Our fears in Banquo Stick deep; and in his royalty of nature Reigns that which would be fear'd: 'tis much he dares; And, to that dauntless temper of his mind, He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valour To act in safety.

that dauntless temper

Thence to be wrench'd with an unlineal hand, No son of mine succeeding.

a barren sceptre

For Banquo's sons have I filed my mind; For them the gracious Duncan have I murder'd; Put rancours in the vessel of my peace Only for them; and mine eternal jewel

champion me to the utterance!

consider'd of my speeches?

Is patience so predominant in your nature That you can let this go?

pray for this good man and for his issue, Whose heavy hand hath bow'd you to the grave And beggar'd yours for ever?

men, my liege.

which bounteous nature

As hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, curs, Shoughs, water-rugs and demi-wolves, are clept All by the name of dogs: the valued file Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle, The housekeeper, the hunter, every one According to the gift which bounteous nature Hath in him closed; whereby he does receive Particular addition.

Not i' the worst rank

that business, Whose execution takes your enemy off, Grapples you to the heart and love of us, Who wear our health but sickly in his life, Which in his death were perfect.

blows and buffets of the world

weary with disasters, tugg'd with fortune, That I would set my lie on any chance, To mend it, or be rid on't.

sweep him from my sight And bid my will avouch it, yet I must not, For certain friends that are both his and mine, Whose loves I may not drop, but wail his fall Who I myself struck down; and thence it is, That I to your assistance do make love, Masking the business from the common eye For sundry weighty reasons.

sundry weighty reasons

come to you anon.

call upon you straight: abide within.

thy soul's flight

'Tis safer to be that which we destroy Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy.

restless ecstasy

Ere we will eat our meal in fear and sleep In the affliction of these terrible dreams That shake us nightly: better be with the dead, Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace, Than on the torture of the mind to lie In restless ecstasy.

foreign levy

Treason has done his worst: nor steel, nor poison, Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing, Can touch him further.

life's fitful fever

your rugged looks

Gentle my lord, sleek o'er your rugged looks; Be bright and jovial among your guests to-night.

Present him eminence, both with eye and tongue:

lave our honours in these flattering streams, And make our faces vizards to our hearts, Disguising what they are.

night's yawning peal

black Hecate's summons

His cloister'd flight

The shard-borne beetle

ere to black Hecate's summons The shard-borne beetle with his drowsy hums Hath rung night's yawning peal, there shall be done A deed of dreadful note.

his drowsy hums

Makes wing to the rooky wood:

agents to their preys do rouse.

the lated traveller

note of expectation Already are i' the court.

sit down: at first And last the hearty welcome.

mingle with society, And play the humble host.

Be large in mirth; anon we'll drink a measure The table round.

Thou art the nonpareil.

As broad and general as the casing air: But now I am cabin'd, cribb'd, confined, bound in To saucy doubts and fears.

the casing air

twenty trenched gashes

worm that's fled Hath nature that in time will venom breed, No teeth for the present.

Sweet remembrancer

Than pity for mischance!

Please't your highness To grace us with your royal company.

Thy gory locks

canst nod, speak too.

be the maws of kites.

What, quite unmann'd in folly?

Fie, for shame!

Ere human statute

the gentle weal

Stand not upon the order of your going, But go at once.

The secret'st man

relations have By magot-pies and choughs and rooks brought forth The secret'st man of blood.

I am in blood Stepp'd in so far that, should I wade no more, Returning were as tedious as go o'er: Strange things I have in head, that will to hand; Which must be acted ere they may be scann'd.

The close contriver of all harms, Was never call'd to bear my part, Or show the glory of our art?

a wayward son

been but for a wayward son, Spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do, Loves for his own ends, not for you.

Meet me i' the morning: thither he Will come to know his destiny: Your vessels and your spells provide, Your charms and every thing beside.

spend Unto a dismal and a fatal end:

such artificial sprites

magic sleights

hangs a vaporous drop profound; I'll catch it ere it come to ground: And that distill'd by magic sleights Shall raise such artificial sprites As by the strength of their illusion Shall draw him on to his confusion: He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear He hopes 'bove wisdom, grace and fear:

bove wisdom

pitied of Macbeth: marry, he was dead: And the right-valiant Banquo walk'd too late; Whom, you may say, if't please you, Fleance kill'd, For Fleance fled: men must not walk too late.

drink and thralls of sleep?

sir, can you tell Where he bestows himself?

That, by the help of these—with Him above To ratify the work—we may again Give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights, Free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives, Do faithful homage and receive free honours: All which we pine for now: and this report Hath so exasperate the king that he Prepares for some attempt of war.

court of England and unfold His message ere he come, that a swift blessing May soon return to this our suffering country Under a hand accursed!

the brinded cat

the hedge-pig

Round about the cauldron go; In the poison'd entrails throw.

venom sleeping got, Boil thou first i' the charmed pot.

tongue of dog, Adder's fork and blind-worm's sting, Lizard's leg and owlet's wing, For a charm of powerful trouble, Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.

blind-worm's sting

tooth of wolf, Witches' mummy, maw and gulf Of the ravin'd salt-sea shark, Root of hemlock digg'd

the ravin'd salt-sea shark

Nose of Turk and Tartar's lips, Finger of birth-strangled babe Ditch-deliver'd by a drab, Make the gruel thick and slab: Add thereto a tiger's chaudron,

pricking of my thumbs, Something wicked this way comes.

locks, Whoever knocks!

the yesty waves

their warders' heads

bladed corn

nature's germens tumble

Though castles topple on their warders' heads; Though palaces and pyramids do slope Their heads to their foundations; though the treasure Of nature's germens tumble all together, Even till destruction sicken; answer me To what I ask you.

Her nine farrow

sow's blood

the murderer's gibbet

Pour in sow's blood, that hath eaten Her nine farrow; grease that's sweaten From the murderer's gibbet throw Into the flame.

thou art, for thy good caution, thanks; Thou hast harp'd my fear aright: but one word more,—

Macbeth shall never vanquish'd be until Great Birnam wood to high Dunsinane hill Shall come against him.

Sweet bodements

our high-placed Macbeth Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath To time and mortal custom.

Filthy hags

I see That two-fold balls and treble scepters carry: Horrible sight!

treble scepters

the blood-bolter'd Banquo

cheer we up his sprites, And show the best of our delights: I'll charm the air to give a sound, While you perform your antic round: That this great king may kindly say, Our duties did his welcome pay.

the air whereon they ride; And damn'd all those that trust them!

who was't came by?

be The firstlings of my hand.

my dread exploits

The flighty purpose

The very firstlings

crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and done: The castle of Macduff I will surprise; Seize upon Fife; give to the edge o' the sword

the poor wren

He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows The fits o' the season.

when we are traitors And do not know ourselves, when we hold rumour From what we fear, yet know not what we fear, But float upon a wild and violent sea Each way and move.

Things at the worst will cease, or else climb upward To what they were before.

take my leave at once.

Sirrah, your father's dead; And what will you do now?

speak'st with all thy wit: and yet, i' faith, With wit enough for thee.

one that does so is a traitor, and must be hanged.

liars and swearers enow to beat the honest men and hang up them.

Poor prattler

prattler, how thou talk'st!

a homely man's advice

I am too savage; To do worse to you were fell cruelty, Which is too nigh your person.

thou shag-hair'd villain!

fry of treachery!

Weep our sad bosoms empty.

our sad bosoms

our down-fall'n birthdom

and what I can redress, As I shall find the time to friend, I will.

be so perchance.

that tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues, Was once thought honest: you have loved him well.

a weak poor innocent lamb

recoil In an imperial charge.

That which you are my thoughts cannot transpose: Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell; Though all things foul would wear the brows of grace, Yet grace must still look so.

Perchance even there where I did find my doubts.

Why in that rawness left you wife and child, Those precious motives, those strong knots of love, Without leave-taking?

cheque thee: wear thou thy wrongs; The title is affeer'd!

be the villain that thou think'st For the whole space that's in the tyrant's grasp, And the rich East to boot.

more sundry ways

offer Of goodly thousands: but, for all this, When I shall tread upon the tyrant's head, Or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country Shall have more vices than it had before, More suffer and more sundry ways than ever, By him that shall succeed.

you may so hoodwink.

such A stanchless avarice

grows In my most ill-composed affection such A stanchless avarice that, were I king, I should cut off the nobles for their lands, Desire his jewels and this other's house:

sword of our slain kings: yet do not fear; Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will.

more pernicious root

what I am truly, Is thine and my poor country's to command: Whither indeed, before thy here-approach, Old Siward, with ten thousand warlike men, Already at a point, was setting forth.

our warranted quarrel

wretched souls

All swoln and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye, The mere despair of surgery, he cures, Hanging a golden stamp about their necks, Put on with holy prayers: and 'tis spoken, To the succeeding royalty he leaves The healing benediction.

sundry blessings

hath a heavenly gift of prophecy, And sundry blessings hang about his throne, That speak him full of grace.

Alas, poor country!

the dead man's knell

That of an hour's age doth hiss the speaker: Each minute teems a new one.

has not batter'd at their peace?

not a niggard of your speech: how goes't?

Which was to my belief witness'd the rather, For that I saw the tyrant's power a-foot: Now is the time of help; your eye in Scotland Would create soldiers, make our women fight, To doff their dire distresses.

their dire distresses

We are coming thither: gracious England hath Lent us good Siward and ten thousand men; An older and a better soldier none That Christendom gives out.

words That would be howl'd out in the desert air, Where hearing should not latch them.

is it a fee-grief Due to some single breast?

a fee-grief

quarry of these murder'd deer, To add the death of you.

the o'er-fraught heart

grief that does not speak Whispers the o'er-fraught heart and bids it break.

be from thence!

whetstone of your sword: let grief Convert to anger; blunt not the heart, enrage it.

braggart with my tongue!

heavens, Cut short all intermission; front to front Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself; Within my sword's length set him; if he 'scape, Heaven forgive him too!

Our lack is nothing but our leave; Macbeth Is ripe for shaking, and the powers above Put on their instruments.

her night-gown

this slumbery agitation

time to do't.—Hell is murky!—Fie, my lord, fie! a soldier, and afeard?

my lord, no more o' that: you mar all with this starting.

all the gentry

his distemper'd cause

Hang loose about him, like a giant's robe Upon a dwarfish thief.

the sickly weal

medicine of the sickly weal, And with him pour we in our country's purge Each drop of us.

To dew the sovereign flower and drown the weeds.

No man that's born of woman Shall e'er have power upon thee.'

devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon!

Geese, villain!

Go prick thy face, and over-red thy fear, Thou lily-liver'd boy.

those linen cheeks

push Will cheer me ever, or disseat me now.

troops of friends, I must not look to have; but, in their stead, Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honour, breath, Which the poor heart would fain deny, and dare not.

the stuff'd bosom

Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow, Raze out the written troubles of the brain And with some sweet oblivious antidote Cleanse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous stuff Which weighs upon the heart?

—Pull't off, I say.— What rhubarb, cyme, or what purgative drug, Would scour these English hence?

what purgative drug

a sound and pristine health

hew him down a bough And bear't before him: thereby shall we shadow The numbers of our host and make discovery Err in report of us.

Hang out our banners on the outward walls; The cry is still 'They come:' our castle's strength Will laugh a siege to scorn: here let them lie Till famine and the ague eat them up: Were they not forced with those that should be ours, We might have met them dareful, beard to beard, And beat them backward home.

a night-shriek

Thou comest

thou comest to use thy tongue; thy story quickly.

I see it coming; I say, a moving grove.

care not if thou dost for me as much.

equivocation of the fiend That lies like truth: 'Fear not, till Birnam wood Do come to Dunsinane:' and now a wood Comes toward Dunsinane.

this which he avouches does appear, There is nor flying hence nor tarrying here.

aweary of the sun, And wish the estate o' the world were now undone.

die with harness on our back.

your leafy screens

You, worthy uncle, Shall, with my cousin, your right-noble son, Lead our first battle: worthy Macduff and we Shall take upon 's what else remains to do, According to our order.

Those clamorous harbingers

thou call'st thyself a hotter name Than any is in hell.

prove the lie thou speak'st.

Thou wast

be'st slain and with no stroke of mine, My wife and children's ghosts will haunt me still.

wretched kerns

strike at wretched kerns, whose arms Are hired to bear their staves: either thou, Macbeth, Or else my sword with an unbatter'd edge I sheathe again undeeded.

an unbatter'd edge

one of greatest note Seems bruited.

this great clatter

charged With blood of thine already.

the intrenchant air

fall thy blade on vulnerable crests; I bear a charmed life, which must not yield, To one of woman born.

these juggling fiends

the rabble's curse

his prowess confirm'd

sorrow Must not be measured by his worth, for then It hath no end.

Had I as many sons as I have hairs, I would not wish them to a fairer death: And so, his knell is knoll'd.

thee compass'd

The usurper's cursed head

his fiend-like queen

’tis bitter cold, And I am sick at heart.

rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.

liegemen to the Dane.

Who hath relieved you?

When yond same star

harrows me with fear and wonder.

the sensible and true avouch

believe Without the sensible and true avouch Of mine own eyes.

the sledded Polacks

jump at this dead hour, With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.

this sweaty haste

the night joint-labourer

brazen cannon

cast of brazen cannon, And foreign mart for implements of war; Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task Does not divide the Sunday from the week; What might be toward, that this sweaty haste Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day: Who is’t that can inform me?

head Of this post-haste and romage in the land.

unimproved mettle

those foresaid lands

this portentous figure

mote it is to trouble the mind’s eye.

the most high and palmy state

trains of fire and dews of blood, Disasters in the sun; and the moist star Upon whose influence Neptune’s empire stands Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse: And even the like precurse of fierce events, As harbingers preceding still the fates And prologue to the omen coming on, Have heaven and earth together demonstrated Unto our climatures and countrymen.

even the like precurse

privy to thy country’s fate, Which, happily, foreknowing may avoid, O, speak!

his lofty and shrill-sounding throat

in sea or fire, in earth or air, The extravagant and erring spirit hies To his confine: and of the truth herein This present object made probation.

bird of dawning singeth all night long: And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad; The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike, No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,

jointress to this warlike state, Have we, as ’twere with a defeated joy— With an auspicious and a dropping eye, With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage, In equal scale weighing delight and dole— Taken to wife: nor have we herein barr’d Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone With this affair along.

here writ

His further gait

last Upon his will I seal’d my hard consent: I do beseech you, give him leave to go.

laboursome petition

spend it at thy will!

more than kin, and less than kind.

for ever with thy vailed lids Seek for thy noble father in the dust:

thy vailed lids

shapes of grief, That can denote me truly: these indeed seem, For they are actions that a man might play: But I have that within which passeth show; These but the trappings and the suits of woe.

impious stubbornness

our peevish opposition

unmanly grief

obstinate condolement

This unprevailing woe

whereof, No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day, But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell, And the king’s rouse the heavens shall bruit again, Re-speaking earthly thunder.

resolve itself into a dew!

Fie on’t

an unweeded garden

that was, to this, Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother That he might not beteem the winds of heaven Visit her face too roughly.

her galled eyes

A truant disposition

truster of your own report Against yourself: I know you are no truant.

thrift, Horatio!

middle of the night, Been thus encounter’d.

he walk’d By their oppress’d and fear-surprised eyes, Within his truncheon’s length; whilst they, distill’d Almost to jelly with the act of fear, Stand dumb and speak not to him.

his truncheon’s length

dreadful secrecy

moderate haste

one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.

A sable silver’d

watch to-night; Perchance ’twill walk again.

hell itself should gape And bid me hold my peace.

hitherto conceal’d this sight, Let it be tenable in your silence still; And whatsoever else shall hap to-night, Give it an understanding, but no tongue: I will requite your loves.

Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s eyes.

wide withal

The inward service

service of the mind and soul Grows wide withal.

do, Carve for himself; for on his choice depends The safety and health of this whole state; And therefore must his choice be circumscribed Unto the voice and yielding of that body Whereof he is the head.

your chaste treasure

the morn and liquid dew

The chariest maid

galls the infants of the spring, Too oft before their buttons be disclosed, And in the morn and liquid dew of youth Contagious blastments are most imminent.

the steep and thorny way

a puff’d and reckless libertine

the primrose path

his own rede

some ungracious pastors

Whiles, like a puff’d and reckless libertine, Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads, And recks not his own rede.

dalliance treads

precepts in thy memory See thou character.

these few precepts

Grapple them to thy soul with hoops of steel; But do not dull thy palm with entertainment Of each new-hatch’d, unfledged comrade.

each new-hatch’d, unfledged comrade

Beware Of entrance to a quarrel, but being in, Bear’t that the opposed may beware of thee.

to thine ownself be true, And it must follow, as the night the day, Thou canst not then be false to any man.

You do not understand yourself so clearly As it behoves my daughter and your honour.

That you have ta’en these tenders for true pay, Which are not sterling.

The kettle-drum

pure as grace, As infinite as man may undergo— Shall in the general censure take corruption From that particular fault: the dram of eale Doth all the noble substance of a doubt To his own scandal.

oped his ponderous and marble jaws, To cast thee up again.

so many fathoms

thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.

the fretful porpentine

be than the fat weed That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf, Wouldst thou not stir in this.

moved, Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven, So lust, though to a radiant angel link’d, Will sate itself in a celestial bed, And prey on garbage.

such an enmity

porches of my ears did pour The leperous distilment; whose effect Holds such an enmity with blood of man That swift as quicksilver it courses through The natural gates and alleys of the body, And with a sudden vigour doth posset And curd, like eager droppings into milk, The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine; And a most instant tetter bark’d about, Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust, All my smooth body.

a most instant tetter

cursed hebenon

The leperous distilment

her bosom lodge

O, fie! Hold

you, my sinews, grow not instant old, But bear me stiffly up.

an arrant knave

For your desire to know what is between us, O’ermaster’t as you may.

help you mercy, How strange or odd soe’er

Take you, as ’twere, some distant knowledge of him;

savageness in unreclaimed blood, Of general assault.

fetch of wit: You laying these slight sullies on my son, As ’twere a thing a little

these slight sullies

foul’d, Ungarter’d, and down-gyved to his ankle; Pale as his shirt; his knees knocking each other; And with a look so piteous in purport As if he had been loosed out of hell To speak of horrors—he comes before me.

took me by the wrist and held me hard; Then goes he to the length of all his arm; And, with his other hand thus o’er his brow, He falls to such perusal of my face As he would draw it.

such perusal

raised a sigh so piteous and profound As it did seem to shatter all his bulk And end his being: that done, he lets me go: And, with his head over his shoulder turn’d, He seem’d to find his way without his eyes; For out o’ doors he went without their helps, And, to the last, bended their light on me.

Whose violent property fordoes

better heed

fear’d he did but trifle, And meant to wreck thee; but, beshrew my jealousy!

so much gentry

my good liege

head and source of all your son’s distemper.

our o’erhasty marriage

a god kissing carrion

he said I was a fishmonger: he is far gone, far gone: and truly in my youth I suffered much extremity for love; very near this.

sends you to prison hither?

Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; but I thank you: and sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny.

deal justly with me: come, come; nay, speak.

this brave o’erhanging firmament

all my mirth

roof fretted with golden fire, why, it appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours.

quintessence of dust?

what lenten entertainment

the wonted pace

many wearing rapiers

afraid of goose-quills and dare scarce come thither.

so berattle

tarre them to controversy: there was, for a while, no money bid for argument, unless the poet and the player went to cuffs in the question.

row of the pious chanson will show you more; for look, where my abridgement comes.

altitude of a chopine.

’twas caviare to the general

couched in the ominous horse, Hath now this dread and black complexion smear’d With heraldry more dismal;

whose sable arms

orb below As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder Doth rend the region, so, after Pyrrhus’ pause, Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work; And never did the Cyclops’ hammers fall On Mars’s armour forged for proof eterne With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword Now falls on Priam.

seen, with tongue in venom steep’d, ’Gainst Fortune’s state would treason have pronounced: But if the gods themselves did see her then When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport In mincing with his sword her husband’s limbs, The instant burst of clamour that she made, Unless things mortal move them not at all, Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven, And passion in the gods.”

see the players well bestowed?

a bad epitaph

Niggard of question; but, of our demands, Most free in his reply.

assay him To any pastime?

players We o’er-raught on the way: of these we told him

entreat your majesties To hear and see the matter.

doth much content me To hear him so inclined.

lawful espials

his wonted way

thing that helps it Than is my deed to my most painted word: O heavy burthen!

a bare bodkin

dread of something after death, The undiscover’d country from whose bourn No traveller returns, puzzles the will And makes us rather bear those ills we have Than fly to others that we know not of?

is to a bawd than the force of honesty can translate beauty into his likeness: this was sometime a paradox, but now the time gives it proof.

Get thee to a nunnery: why wouldst thou be a breeder of sinners?

arrant knaves

thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape calumny.

you jig, you amble, and you lisp, and nick-name God’s creatures, and make your wantonness your ignorance.

most deject

honey of his music vows, Now see that noble and most sovereign reason, Like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh; That unmatch’d form and feature of blown youth Blasted with ecstasy: O, woe is me, To have seen what I have seen, see what I see!

expel This something-settled matter in his heart, Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus From fashion of himself.

whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness.

capable of nothing but inexplicable dumbshows and noise: I would have such a fellow whipped for o’erdoing Termagant; it out-herods Herod: pray you, avoid it.

a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear

come tardy off, though it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve; the censure of the which one must in your allowance o’erweigh a whole theatre of others.

thou art e’en as just a man As e’er my conversation coped withal.

hope from thee That no revenue hast but thy good spirits, To feed and clothe thee?

the candied tongue

absurd pomp

As one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing, A man that fortune’s buffets and rewards Hast ta’en with equal thanks: and blest are those Whose blood and judgment are so well commingled, That they are not a pipe for fortune’s finger To sound what stop she please.

thou seest that act afoot, Even with the very comment of thy soul Observe mine uncle: if his occulted guilt Do not itself unkennel in one speech, It is a damned ghost that we have seen, And my imaginations are as foul As Vulcan’s stithy.

heedful note

your only jig-maker

posy of a ring?

far from cheer and from your former state, That I distrust you.

distrust, Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must: For women’s fear and love holds quantity;

neither aught

let me be accurst!

Their own enactures

love on fortune tend; For who not needs shall never lack a friend, And who in want a hollow friend doth try, Directly seasons him his enemy.

come mischance between us twain!

poison in jest; no offence i’ the world.

piece of work: but what o’ that?

a knavish piece

the galled jade wince

we that have free souls, it touches us not: let the galled jade wince, our withers are unwrung.

bellow for revenge.”

the croaking raven

dire property

i’ the garden for’s estate.

writ in choice

The hart ungalled play

the stricken deer

A very, very—pajock

the ghost’s word

far more choler

yonder cloud

is like a weasel.

to see your kingly eyes: when I shall, first asking your pardon thereunto, recount the occasion of my sudden and more strange return.

tell him to his teeth, “Thus didest thou.”

o’errule me to a peace.

thine own peace

the unworthiest siege

youth no less becomes The light and careless livery that it wears Than settled age his sables and his weeds, Importing health and graveness.

such wondrous doing

Your sudden coming o’er

are you like the painting of a sorrow, A face without a heart?

a spendthrift sigh

sword unbated, and in a pass of practice Requite him for your father.

a double varnish

anoint my sword.

gall him slightly, It may be death.

Twere better not assay’d: therefore this project Should have a back or second, that might hold, If this should blast in proof.

a solemn wager

One woe

the glassy stream

our cold maids

her coronet weeds

fantastic garlands

the weeping brook

There with fantastic garlands did she come Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples That liberal shepherds give a grosser name, But our cold maids do dead men’s fingers call them: There, on the pendent boughs her coronet weeds Clambering to hang, an envious sliver broke; When down her weedy trophies and herself Fell in the weeping brook.

the pendent boughs

an envious sliver

her weedy trophies

As one incapable of her own distress, Or like a creature native and indued Unto that element: but long it could not be Till that her garments, heavy with their drink, Pull’d the poor wretch from her melodious lay To muddy death.

much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia, And therefore I forbid my tears: but yet It is our trick; nature her custom holds, Let shame say what it will: when these are gone, The woman will be out.

speech of fire, that fain would blaze, But that this folly douts it.

burial that wilfully seeks her own salvation?

lies the point: if I drown myself wittingly, it argues an act: and an act hath three branches; it is, to act, to do, to perform: argal, she drowned herself wittingly.

shortens not his own life.

is’t; crowner’s quest law.

crowner’s quest law

she should have been buried out o’ Christian burial.

confess thyself

stronger than either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?

The gallows-maker

outlives a thousand tenants.

those that do ill: now thou dost ill to say the gallows is built stronger than the church: argal, the gallows may do well to thee.

mason, a shipwright, or a carpenter

more about it, for your dull ass will not mend his pace with beating; and, when you are asked this question next, say “a grave-maker:” the houses that he makes last till doomsday.

get thee to Yaughan: fetch me a stoup of liquor.

was very sweet, To contract, O, the time, for, ah, my behove, O, methought, there was nothing meet.

Custom hath

the daintier sense

’Tis e’en

shipped me intil the land, As if I had never been such.

jowls it to the ground, as if it were Cain’s jaw-bone, that did the first murder!

Cain’s jaw-bone

pate of a politician, which this ass now o’er-reaches; one that would circumvent God, might it not?

Or of a courtier; which could say “Good morrow, sweet lord!

knocked about the mazzard with a sexton’s spade: here’s fine revolution, an we had the trick to see’t.

a sexton’s spade

play at loggats with ’em?

ache to think on’t.

his quillets

this rude knave

Ay, my lord, and of calf-skins too.

sheep and calves which seek out assurance in that.

lie in’t, to be in’t and say it is thine: ’tis for the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou liest.

lie, sir; ’twill away again, from me to you.

note of it; the age is grown so picked that the toe of the peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, he galls his kibe.

e’en with losing his wits.

sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.

many pocky corses

hold the laying in—he will last you some eight year or nine year: a tanner will last you nine year.

a sore decayer

your whoreson dead body

tanned with his trade, that he will keep out water a great while; and your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead body.

lain in the earth three and twenty years.

A whoreson mad fellow

the king’s jester

Prithee, Horatio, tell me one thing.

trace the noble dust of Alexander, till he find it stopping a bung-hole?

Twere to consider too curiously, to consider so.

faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither with modesty enough, and likelihood to lead it: as thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander returneth into dust; the dust is earth; of earth we make loam; and why of that loam, whereto he was converted, might they not stop a beer-barrel?

such maimed rites

Her maiden strewments

allow’d her virgin crants

sing a requiem and such rest to her As to peace-parted souls.

thee, churlish priest, A ministering angel shall my sister be, When thou liest howling.

treble woe

Whose wicked deed

stand Like wonder-wounded hearers?

Thou pray’st

I am not splenitive and rash, Yet have I something in me dangerous, Which let thy wiseness fear: hold off thy hand.

outface me with leaping in her grave?

prate of mountains, let them throw Millions of acres on us, till our ground, Singeing his pate against the burning zone, Make Ossa like a wart!

Nay, an thou’lt mouth, I’ll rant as well as thou.

work on him; Anon, as patient as the female dove, When that her golden couplets are disclosed, His silence will sit drooping.

her golden couplets

Worse than the mutines in the bilboes.

serves us well, When our deep plots do pall: and that should teach us There’s a divinity that shapes our ends, Rough-hew them how we will

O royal knavery!—an exact command

How to forget that learning, but, sir, now It did me yeoman’s service: wilt thou know The effect of what I wrote?

her wheaten garland

knowing of these contents, Without debatement further, more or less, He should the bearers put to sudden death, Not shriving-time allow’d.

his faithful tributary

a comma ’tween

heaven ordinant

my father’s signet

had my father’s signet in my purse, Which was the model of that Danish seal; Folded the writ up in form of the other, Subscribed it, gave’t the impression, placed it safely, The changeling never known.

what to this was sequent Thou know’st already.

‘Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes Between the pass and fell incensed points Of mighty opposites.

canker of our nature come In further evil?

such cozenage

laid a great wager on your head: sir, this is the matter

I know, to divide him inventorially would dizzy the arithmetic of memory, and yet but yaw

verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great article;

such dearth

concernancy, sir?

very liberal conceit

wagered with him six Barbary horses: against the which he has imponed, as I take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so: three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of very liberal conceit.

carriages, sir, are the hangers.

three liberal-conceited carriages

and it would come to immediate trial, if your lordship would vouchsafe the answer.

nothing but my shame and the odd hits.

I commend my duty to your lordship.

comply with his dug, before he sucked it.

outward habit

kind of yesty collection, which carries them through and through the most fond and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to their trial, the bubbles are out.

the most fond and winnowed opinions

yesty collection

the drossy age

the same bevy

is ready; now or whensoever, provided I be so able as now.

use some gentle entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play.

kind of gain-giving, as would perhaps trouble a woman.

obey it: I will forestall their repair hither, and say you are not fit.

aught of what he leaves, what is’t to leave betimes?

needs have heard, how I am punish’d With sore distraction.

sore distraction

Hamlet from himself be ta’en away, And when he’s not himself does wrong Laertes, Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it.

madness: if’t be so, Hamlet is of the faction that is wrong’d;

Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil Free me so far in your most generous thoughts, That I have shot mine arrow o’er the house, And hurt my brother.

In terms of honour I stand aloof; 

To keep my name ungored.

will no reconcilement

receive your offer’d love like love, And will not wrong it.

in mine ignorance Your skill shall, like a star i’ the darkest night, Stick fiery off indeed.

mine ignorance

foils, young Osric.

you both: But since he is better’d, we have therefore odds.

Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.

let the kettle to the trumpet speak, The trumpet to the cannoneer without, The cannons to the heavens, the heavens to earth, “Now the king drinks to Hamlet.”

a wary eye

set it by awhile.

scant of breath.

carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.

the poison’d cup

wanton of me.

mine own springe

woodcock to mine own springe, Osric; I am justly kill’d with mine own treachery.

The treacherous instrument is in thy hand, Unbated and envenom’d: the foul practice Hath turn’d itself on me; lo, here I lie, Never to rise again: thy mother’s poison’d: I can no more: the king, the king’s to blame.

come not upon thee, Nor thine on me!

Wretched queen

draw thy breath in pain, To tell my story.

this harsh world

But I do prophesy the election lights On Fortinbras: he has my dying voice; So tell him, with the occurrents, more and less, Which have solicited.

aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.

cries on havoc.

thine eternal cell

toward in thine eternal cell, That thou so many princes at a shot So bloodily hast struck?

The ears are senseless that should give us hearing, To tell him his commandment is fulfill’d, That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead: Where should we have our thanks?

the yet unknowing world

so shall you hear Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts, Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters, Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause, And, in this upshot, purposes mistook Fall’n on the inventors’ heads: all this can I Truly deliver.

embrace my fortune: I have some rights of memory in this kingdom, Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.

lest more mischance, On plots and errors, happen.

an ineffectual, inarticulate man

lifeless, silky hair

an unassertive figure

hovered in the background of his family’s life, an unassertive figure with a face half-obliterated by lifeless, silky hair, continually occupied in “taking care” of his wife, continually harassed by the idea that he didn’t and couldn’t understand her.

the consummate art

culture rich in all arts and traditions, barren of all ideas, in the last of those days when the great gardener clipped the inferior roses to produce one perfect bud.

one perfect bud

this almost entirely because she was a little bit weary, a little bit sad.

a tiresome season

a facile imaginative mind

an auburn-haired boy

a mild, almost epidemic consumption

especially after several astounding bracers.

acquiescent bellboys

Amory was biting acquiescent bellboys in the Waldorf, outgrowing a natural repugnance to chamber music and symphonies, and deriving a highly specialized education from his mother.

talk glibly, if rather reminiscently, of Brahms and Mozart and Beethoven.

sampled his mother’s apricot cordial, and as the taste pleased him, he became quite tipsy.

a vulgar, plebeian reaction

This son of mine,” he heard her tell a room full of awestruck, admiring women one day, “is entirely sophisticated and quite charming—but delicate—we’re all delicate; here, you know.”

sinking her voice to a whisper, she told them of the apricot cordial.

her beautiful bosom

She was a brave raconteuse, but many were the keys turned in sideboard locks that night against the possible defection of little Bobby or Barbara.

sideboard locks

These domestic pilgrimages

lay siege to her nerves.

old, moth-eaten London accents

there’s a time in every Western woman’s life—she feels her husband is prosperous enough for her to have—accent—they try to impress me, my dear—” Though she thought of her body as a mass of frailties, she considered her soul quite as ill, and therefore important in her life.

an enchantingly wavering attitude

the bourgeois quality

the mighty altar

a decided penchant

discussed the matter pro and con with an intellectual romancing quite devoid of sappiness.

destined to spend the ensuing two years with his aunt and uncle.

the ensuing two years

the middul clawses

the Umuricun revolution

blundering on purpose.

the slippery, shovel-scraped sidewalks

and came in sight of Myra’s house, on the half-hour after five, a lateness which he fancied his mother would have favored.

all the starchy little females

divested himself of cap and coat.

the shrill squawk

put him on the rack without a scruple.

wait till ha’past five.

Amory’s shredded poise

sixty reproachful eyes

blasé seclusion

a rather boxlike plan

based upon some “trade-lasts” gleaned at dancing-school, to the effect that he was “awful good-looking and English, sort of.”

pictured an all-night tobacco debauch, with Amory pale and reeling from the effect of nicotined lungs.

the dim, chill air

peering through the frosted glass along the lamp-lit street, he made out the dark outline of the bobbing party.

a violent, jerky effort

half misty

a cosy fire

drifted up the stairs and Myra led the way into the little den of his dreams, where a cosy fire was burning before a big sink-down couch.

a big sink-down couch

Amory, a cradle for many an emotional crisis.

drooped against his shoulder.

bruised vanity

fumbling with her lorgnette.

the vapid odor

the trouble with this one was that you breathed into it and your breath froze; one day the darn thing froze his cheek.

bumping into fences, rolling in gutters, and pursuing his eccentric course out of Amory’s life.

the coin-pass, chameleon ties

stroll home in the balmy air of August night, dreaming along Hennepin and Nicollet Avenues, through the gay crowd.

the balmy air

the becoming he dreamed of, never the being.

a collar with the edges unassailably meeting, purple socks, and handkerchief with a purple border peeping from his breast pocket.

a purple accordion tie

a supple dancer

desire to influence people in almost every way, even for evil.

coldness and lack of affection, amounting sometimes to cruelty.

strain of weakness running crosswise through his makeup.

surly sensitiveness

tempered with self-suspicion if not self-knowledge, a sense of people as automatons to his will, a desire to “pass” as many boys as possible and get to a vague top of the world.

midsummer languor

mother waiting in her electric on the gravelled station drive.

slipped cautiously into a speed of two miles an hour, beseeching Amory to act as sentinel; and at one busy crossing she made him get out and run ahead to signal her forward like a traffic policeman.

the old cynical kinship

Aside from a minute shyness, he felt that the old cynical kinship with his mother had not been one bit broken.

foliage-hung hiding-places

the many flowerbeds

cats that prowled the many flowerbeds and were silhouetted suddenly at night against the darkening trees.

spoke of it as a sturdy, gallant feat.

soared through the air

surprised himself by saying that, and he pictured how Froggy would have gaped.

fret away my years in this country.

I feel my life should have drowsed away close to an older, mellower civilization, a land of greens and autumnal browns

an older, mellower civilization

She stroked his auburn hair gently.

the Knickerbocker families

doubling back to New York to pay his tutelary visit.

crowded with dreams of athletic prowess at school that he considered this visit only as a rather tiresome prelude to the great adventure.

athletic prowess

a rather tiresome prelude

and there lived its owner, between his trips to all parts of the Roman-Catholic world, rather like an exiled Stuart king waiting to be called to the rule of his land.

an ancient, rambling structure

all his clever jibes

the jovial, impressive prelate who could dazzle an embassy ball, and the green-eyed, intent youth, in his first long trousers, accepted in their own minds a relation of father and son within a half-hour’s conversation.

You loathe all science and mathematics—” Amory nodded vehemently.

a crowded hour

his staid old mind

is really at sea and longs for a sturdy spar like the Church to cling to.”

a sturdy spar

the mellow sunshine

“But his education ought not to be entrusted to a school or college.”

Amory’s intellect

skirmish with his own generation.

clean, flaccid and innocuous preparatory schools

went all wrong at the start, was generally considered both conceited and arrogant, and universally detested.

a reckless brilliancy

sulking in corners and reading after lights.

do that posing absolutely essential to him.

returned to Minneapolis, tightlipped and strangely jubilant.

cope with them—to conform to what others expect of him.”

hemmed again with delicate reticence, and continued: “They seem to think that you’re—ah—rather too fresh—” Amory could stand no more.

delicate reticence

but this time he saw it by electric light, and romance gleamed from the chariot-race sign on Broadway and from the women’s eyes at the Astor, where he and young Paskert from St. Regis’ had dinner.

the nervous twanging

the nervous twanging and discord of untuned violins and the sensuous, heavy fragrance of paint and powder, he moved in a sphere of epicurean delight.

the sensuous, heavy fragrance

facile froth-like comedy

laid on a roof-garden, and the cellos sighed to the musical moon, while light adventure and facile froth-like comedy flitted back and forth in the calcium.

Amory’s musings

a melancholy strain

the worldly youth

a weary excitement

flashed on and off like myriad lights, pale or rouged faces, tired, yet sustained by a weary excitement.

known at every restaurant and café, wearing a dress-suit from early evening to early morning, sleeping away the dull hours of the forenoon.

heroism of plunging, crashing bodies and aching limbs.

a snappy, exhilarating afternoon

bruised and weary, but still elusive, circling an end, twisting, changing pace, straight-arming.

the scoffing superiority

new and more conventional planking on the fundamental Amory.

the ferreting eyes

a thick enough overlay

his tendency to pose, his laziness, and his love of playing the fool, were now taken as a matter of course, recognized eccentricities in a star quarterback, a clever actor, and the editor of the St. Regis Tattler: it puzzled him to see impressionable small boys imitating the very vanities that had not long ago been contemptible weaknesses.

slumped into dreamy content.

lyrical outpourings

swinging into the wide air, into a fairyland of piping satyrs and nymphs with the faces of fair-haired girls he passed in the streets of Eastchester.

dwindled out of sight in a golden dot.

stirred his languid interest.

stubbed his toe upon the concrete minutiae of it.

keep my temper when they get selfish and then they think they pay me back by voting for me and telling me I’m the ‘big man’ of St. Regis’s.

hair soaked in water or tonic, parted in the middle, and slicked back as the current of fashion dictated.

tortoiseshell spectacles

wiser and shrewder than his contemporaries, managing some team or other, and keeping his cleverness carefully concealed.

the long, green swards

felt unnecessarily stiff and awkward among these white-flannelled, bareheaded youths, who must be juniors and seniors, judging from the savoir faire with which they strolled.

a hurried skirmish

returned hurriedly to 12 University, left his derby, and, emerging bareheaded, loitered down Nassau Street, stopping to investigate a display of athletic photographs in a store window, including a large one of Allenby, the football captain, and next attracted by the sign “Jigger Shop” over a confectionary window.

Jigger Shop

leather pennants

tried conscientiously to look both pleasantly blasé and casually critical, which was as near as he could analyze the prevalent facial expression.

the rickety stairs

the fashionable low swoop

shook hands with the fashionable low swoop.

got to swallow everything the first year.

Lot of pep, though,” he insisted.

the glib comments

song that included much stamping and then by an endless, incoherent dirge.

an endless, incoherent dirge

their attitude a mixture of critical wit and tolerant amusement.

The great tapestries

tapestries of trees had darkened to ghosts back at the last edge of twilight.

standing in mid-campus in the small hours and singing tenor songs to the stars, arousing mingled emotions in the couched undergraduates according to the sentiment of their moods.

a white-clad phalanx

the great dreaming spires

the handsome, prosperous big-game crowds

its half-grasped significance

this Amory resented social barriers as artificial distinctions made by the strong to bolster up their weak retainers and keep out the almost strong.

their weak retainers

censor of conceit, vendor of rare, satirical humor.

chided him gently for being curious at this inopportune time about the intricacies of the social system, but liked him and was both interested and amused.

gliding in quietly at night and off again in the early morning to get up his work in the library

the coveted first place

won the competition, but, returning to college in February, he dauntlessly went after the prize again.

a reluctant graduate

flamboyant Colonial

prep-school standards; Cap and Gown, anti-alcoholic, faintly religious and politically powerful; flamboyant Colonial; literary Quadrangle; and the dozen others, varying in age and position.

an impressive mélange

until at club elections in sophomore year everyone should be sewed up in some bag for the rest of his college career.

the noncommittal man

the embryo successes

the lonely grind

more self-confidence, dress better, cut a swathe

the glittering caste system

only a sweaty bourgeois

a pantry scene

her smooth bust

stale milk

sail into prominence on Burne’s coattails.

unless I could be damn debonaire about it—introduce her to all the prize parlor-snakes, and the football captain, and all that simple stuff.”

the mad wags

come back in half an hour—startle ’em.”

wandered curiously to his fellow-luncher’s book.

a voluminous keenness

D’Invilliers,” who signed the passionate love-poems in the Lit.

that awful highbrow

without much conception of social competition and such phenomena of absorbing interest.

stooped shoulders

A faint chord

struck in Amory’s memory.

tortoise-rimmed spectacles

tried hard to look at Princeton through the satiated eyes of Oscar Wilde and Swinburne—or “Fingal O’Flaherty” and “Algernon Charles,” as he called them in précieuse jest.

the satiated eyes

ceiling of Tom’s room and decorated the walls with imitation tapestry, bought at an auction, tall candlesticks and figured curtains.

being clever and literary without effeminacy or affectation.

ostensible epigrams

addressing him as “Dorian” and pretending to encourage in him wicked fancies and attenuated tendencies to ennui.

rolled on the floor in stifled laughter.

and needed merely watered hair, a smaller range of conversation, and a darker brown hat to become quite regular.

heedless ears

his poetic patter

while swans made effective atmosphere in the artificial pools, and slow clouds sailed harmoniously above the willows.

 The night mist

clustered about the spires and towers, and then settled below them, so that the dreaming peaks were still in lofty aspiration toward the sky.

lofty aspiration

myriad faint squares

the damp grass

a deep and reverent devotion

its uppermost tip

the quiet halls with an occasional late-burning scholastic light held his imagination in a strong grasp, and the chastity of the spire became a symbol of this perception.

made him dreamily acquiescent, it would then overawe him.

the very throb

excitement that might have been the very throb of its slow heart.

whose faint ripple

stream where he was to throw a stone whose faint ripple would be vanishing almost as it left his hand.

lay without moving, his hands clinched.

sprang to his feet and gave his clothes a tentative pat.

said aloud to the sundial.

the whole affair failed either to thrill or interest him.

an irate ticket-holder

temperamental lassitude

the leading lady rushed into the foreground, setting his hands and feet in an atmospheric mince; and as the coach clapped and stamped and tumped and da-da’d, they hashed out a dance.

an atmospheric mince

A great, seething anthill

A big, barnlike auditorium

the spotlight man rehearsing by throwing weird shafts into angry eyes; over all the constant tuning of the orchestra or the cheerful tumpty-tump of a Triangle tune.

perches on a box and thinks how much simpler it was in his day.

those damn milkmaid costumes

a riotous mystery

the dark-whiskered man in the pony-ballet, who “absolutely won’t shave twice a day, doggone it!”

furnished extraordinary punch

approved for a certain verve that transcended its loud accent—however, it was a Yale town, and as the Yale Glee Club was expected in a week the Triangle received only divided homage.

the spectacled windjammers

except in the third car, which was called the “animal car,” and where were herded the spectacled windjammers of the orchestra.

atmosphere of flowers and greasepaint, and the ponies took off their corsets with abdominal pains and sighs of relief.

post haste

was in full stride, confident, nervous, and jubilant.

so without compunction he wired his mother not to expect him.

a furtive excitement

one vast juvenile intrigue

strut and fret in the lobby, taking another cocktail, scrupulously attired and waiting.

such entertainments as this are not half so bad as they are painted, only rather wearying.

fringed with long dark eyelashes.

a water-faucet

lumpy, husky young men

a slight lump of nervousness in her throat.

came a sinking sensation that made her ask: “How do you mean he’s heard about me?

her happy tremble

her fist clinched suddenly under the fur robe.

from the corners where they skulked politely.

he was good-looking, “sort of distinguished, when he wants to be,” had a line, and was properly inconstant.

foxtrotted tentatively around the soft rug below.

maneuvered herself and Froggy Parker, freshman at Harvard, with whom she had once played hopscotch, to a seat on the stairs.

she had expected him to be dark and of garter-advertisement slenderness.

a silk ruffled shirt

fell into a dim confusion.

opened with grapeshot.

enraptured curiosity

he wondered quickly if there would be any difficulty in securing the little den upstairs.

an artificial gait

she walked with an artificial gait at nine and a half, and when her eyes, wide and starry, proclaimed the ingenue most, Amory was proportionately less deceived.

blasé sophistication

impressed by his studied air of blasé sophistication.

an infinite guile

found Isabelle and Amory sitting on the couch in the little den off the reading-room upstairs.

the less subtle beaux

their pseudo-passionate glances

fluttered and chattered downstairs.

most of them were twenty or so, and drove alluring red Stutzes.

fabrication of gayety that would have dazzled a Viennese nobleman.

sink-down sofas

he asked her if she thought he was conceited.

a bum dancer

I have darned hard luck sometimes.”

became almost a term of endearment.

another stray couple

We’re off to slumberland.”

the music seemed quivering just outside.

with their hands clinging and the inevitable looming charmingly close.

low, cosy roadsters

pale starlight

dance-craving

on his side despair, on hers regret, and then the evening went on, with the reassured beaux and the eternal cutting in.

a concealed wit

crept in bed she wondered what he’d say in his special delivery tomorrow.

punching the pillow into a luxurious lump and exploring the cold sheets cautiously.

took great pleasure in shocking them with unorthodox remarks.

a flabbergasted delegation

he played the “nice, unspoilt, ingenuous boy” very much at ease and quite unaware of the object of the call.

the “nice, unspoilt, ingenuous boy

his suddenly neurotic class

he slid smoothly into Cottage with Alec Connage and watched his suddenly neurotic class with much wonder.

snarling disclosures of long-hidden grudges as the Suddenly Prominent remembered snubs of freshman year.

fickle groups

long-hidden grudges

certain coveted bids

unfathomable secret reasons

known to no one but the wielders of the black balls.

the snow-clad campus

a dozen newfound friendships

a critical goopher

reaching beside the bed for a cigarette.

You damned gloom

scattering the bureau cover’s burden on the floor.

at nine-thirty they bowled happily out of town, headed for the sands of Deal Beach.

an emphatic negative chorus

Ferrenby, a defeated competitor, winced a little.

a halcyon day

paean of emotion.

a mighty paean

the most imposing hostelry

the crowded pavilions

where they investigated the crowded pavilions for beauty.

strolled up and down the boardwalk in a row, chanting a monotonous ditty about the sad sea waves.

one of the homeliest girls Amory had ever set eyes on.

little, squinty eyes

said Alec gravely to the waiter, “but any coarse food will do.”

somewhat of a spiritual tax levied.

his impatient superciliousness

slender but well-built, black curly hair

Everything he said sounded intangibly appropriate.

an averagely good mind

a sense of honor with a clear charm and noblesse oblige that varied it from righteousness.

he never seemed to perspire.

all its color and mellow age

the bleak waste

the startled annoyance

solemn systematic roars

more frequently dining frugally at the expense of an unsuspecting restaurateur.

small allurements

spring was too rare to let anything interfere with their colorful ramblings.

a guess that a year before the class would have gaped at.

an intermittent correspondence with Isabelle Borgé, punctuated by violent squabbles and chiefly enlivened by his attempts to find new words for love.

violent squabbles

wrote thirty-page documents almost nightly, and sent them to her in bulky envelopes exteriorly labelled “Part I” and “Part II.”

walked the dusk together.

pretending to be blasé

a blue haze

came out of Sloane’s room to find the dew fallen and the stars old in the sky.

mere pedantry

I don’t catch the subtle things like ‘silver-snarling trumpets.’

the moon-swathed trees

by an inn of lamps and shades, a yellow inn under a yellow moon—then silence, where crescendo laughter fades.

swung out again to the winds of June, mellowed the shadows where the distance grew, then crushed the yellow shadows into blue.

the cracked hollowness

the harpy effect

laid on the sofa in the shoddy little front parlor

a limp mass

strain of the grotesque and squalid

mangled in some alley of his childhood.

a broken fender

wind that stirred a broken fender on the mass of bent metal to a plaintive, tinny sound.

a plaintive, tinny sound

passed in a whirl.

looked at each other tenderly over the fried chicken and knew that their love was to be eternal.

The stag line

and someone sleeker than the rest darts out and cuts in.

haze of his own youth.

rather the faint, mirthless echo

wrap about her shoulders, and they descended the stairs in a silence that endured through dinner.

a doughty warrior

great moths

a feeble, perverse attempt

he caught just the faintest cloud of discontent in her face.

the chintz curtains

seemed a tiresome anticlimax.

a tiresome anticlimax

he felt that the sinews of his heart were twisted somewhat more than he had thought.

a sombre satisfaction

the sweltering crowd

men who thronged the streets.

imbibing the infinite boredom of conic sections.

a flaccid camaraderie

such a bore

their calm and tantalizing respectability

something in their calm and tantalizing respectability breathing defiantly through Mr. Rooney’s fetid parlors distorted their equations into insoluble anagrams.

sauntered from the room.

the world’s worst goopher

from early September to late in the spring was so purposeless and inconsecutive that it seems scarcely worth recording.

My own idleness

Amory, buck up!

his mother’s dignified, reticent attitude

came into actual cognizance of the family finances, and realized what a tidy fortune had once been under his father’s management.

the general upkeep

revel in it.

I’d love the handling of money; it has become quite a senile passion with me.

an overcordial little lady

lack of money to do the things one wants to makes one quite prosy and domestic, but there is still plenty for everything if we are not too extravagant.

the listless quality

this tiresome war

lack of pep?

casting off a lot of your old luggage about success and the superman and all.

your garnered prestige

so closely related were their minds in form and groove.

the melancholy brilliance of the moon, and when you are my age you will give out, as I do, the genial golden warmth of 4 p.m.

a supercilious label

come into really antagonistic contact with the world.

a more valuable beacon

but do keep your clarity of mind, and if fools or sages dare to criticise don’t blame yourself too much.

you would run amuck, and I know whereof I speak; it’s that half-miraculous sixth sense by which you detect evil, it’s the half-realized fear of God in your heart.

He delved further into the misty side streets of literature

sought among the lights of Princeton for someone who might found the Great American Poetic Tradition.

the ominous moons

utterance of a supersoul.

dispensed easy epigrams and thimblefuls of Chartreuse to groups of admirers every night.

the pedantic temperament

our thirsty souls

some forgotten folio

stand, With earnest air and fidgy hand, After this hour, telling you He sat all night and burrowed through Your book.

earnest air and fidgy hand

smile and smirk, And leer, and hasten back to work.

Plays havoc with your best percent.

hold a chair, And some defunct, moth-eaten star Enchants the mental prig you are.

the mental prig

some defunct, moth-eaten star

That broad and beaming view

so from shock to shock you live, A hollow, pale affirmative.

acquaintances of an hour, jostled behind a waiter to a table at a point of vantage; there they took seats and watched.

back to the brilliant blonde whom he was endeavoring to steer around the room.

the old jitney waiter

rose to his feet and swayed back and forth, clinging to his chair.

it would be reasonably discreet for him to trot along in the party.

piling intimately into a taxicab

while temptation crept over him like a warm wind, and his imagination turned to fire

Axia’s beseeching voice

light of the paved hall.

clumsy stumblings

haggard seconds

bursting into a slow run with clumsy stumblings.

someone good who’d know what he meant and hear this damned scuffle.

this damned scuffle

the pale sheen

old rottenness

He turned off the street and darted into an alley, narrow and dark and smelling of old rottenness.

tiny glints

blackness, where the moonlight was shut away except for tiny glints and patches.

a long, sinuous blackness

sank panting into a corner by a fence, exhausted.

intermingled through previous association.

the bare shreds of truth

forcing his mind back and forth like a shrieking saw.

a shrieking saw

the turbid stream

the debonair humor

and he seemed no longer Sloane of the debonair humor and the happy personality, but only one of the evil faces that whirled along the turbid stream.

see it, you’re filthy, too!”

keel over where he stood.

and his terror had hardened on him like plaster.

sat bolt upright, frozen cold in his chair.

looking at him with his mouth drooping, eyes fixed.

certain individuals arrived who stirred it to its plethoric depths.

A type of biographical novel that Amory christened “quest” books.

basking in the high lights of class office.

late one drizzly evening

coming in late one drizzly evening with that triumphant air he always wore after a successful conversational bout.

a brisk knock at the door, and Burne himself came in.

this keen enthusiasm

But the logic of Burne’s objections to the social system dovetailed so completely with everything they had thought, that they questioned rather than argued, and envied the sanity that enabled this man to stand out so against all traditions.

that shaggy old head

aglow with ideas and a sense of shock

a petty consummation

a sombre background

a dreary terror

that incident of the spring before, that filled half his nights with a dreary terror and made him unable to pray.

such reformed rakes

wanted to stag that game and entertain some Harvard friends.

who arrived in his room to josh him.

a ghastly sight

riotous mirth

the stifled laughter

and the clubs in helplessness turned upon Burne their finest weapon: ridicule.

came under the lash of many tongues, until a frailer man than he would have been snowed under.

they dipped into a subject that had interested Amory for a long time—the matter of the bearing of physical attributes on a man’s makeup.

the preponderant number

accused of the dearth.

luminous white blots

a good gait

set off at a good gait, and for an hour swung along in a brisk argument until the lights of Princeton were luminous white blots behind them.

stray dog

seemed to him that life and history were rife with the strong criminal, keen, but often self-deluding;

took to reading and walking as almost his only pursuits.

squirm in his seat; and his face would light up

and once when Burne passed him four feet off, absolutely unseeingly, his mind a thousand miles away, Amory almost choked with the romantic joy of watching him.

heights where others would be forever unable to get a foothold.

some queer ideas

the ensuing conversation

several days before Amory heard an account of the ensuing conversation.

the editor’s sanctum

didn’t know you stooped that low.

capable of only coarse distinctions and puerile generalities.

collapsed backward into the wastebasket.

a play whose name was faintly familiar.

a faint chord of memory.

a faint ripple

Our unfermented souls

there was an idle day Of ours, when happy endings didn’t bore Our unfermented souls

I could adore Your eager face beside me, wide-eyed, gay, Smiling a repertoire while the poor play Reached me as a faint ripple reaches shore.

ponderous reverence

telling people guilelessly that I think I’m a genius

With the amazement of the supercilious Cottage Club.

Mrs. Lawrence, a type of Rome-haunting American whom Amory liked immediately.

ripply golden hair

apart from the dull literature of female virtue.

her steely blue eyes

her level-headedness

the most prosy things

quaint and meditative charm

her prosy old uncle

the stray telegraph boy

a Puck-like creature

a polite but insistent stage-manager attempting to make him give a new interpretation of a part he had conned for years.

a slender tale of a hatpin and an inebriated man and herself.

a tattered gray book

perched above him in the air.

enthusiasm that he grew fond of watching her golden hair bent over a book, brow wrinkled ever so little at hunting her sentence.

fell gradually in love and began to speculate wildly on marriage.

a silly, flaxen Clara, with the gold gone out of her hair and platitudes falling insipidly from her changeling tongue.

a silly, flaxen Clara

her changeling tongue

the ever-present prig

her molten, beaten hair

her gray and velvet dress

Fills the air from her to him With light and languor and little sighs, Just so subtly he scarcely knows.

You sink to the third hell of depression when you think you’ve been slighted.

you are a slave to highballs.

shinny on the wrong side?”

walked off to prison with the unconfinable imp, imagination, dancing in mocking glee beside him.

he would walk beside her and revel in her cheeks moist from the soft water in the new air.

the stained-glass light

fiery red

paused in his sermon and Clara and Amory turned to fiery red.

the March twilight

looked at him with such a startled face that he asked her the matter.

the fading dusk

flare of the corner lamppost.

your own self-reputed brains

wives whom he had known as debutantes

Oh, the enormous conceit of the man!

gleamed on the ways they had trod.

Skeins from braided basket, mortals may not hold; oh, what young extravagant God, who would know or ask it?.

listened to the aliens guffaw and snore while they filled the car with the heavy scent of latest America.

a soft berth

seeking an easy commission and a soft berth.

his own intense longing

a great smattering

I know they don’t count a picayune with you beside your sense of duty

naturally I think that it’s my most innermost conviction

a battered old bicycle

tremendous licentious force

for materialism and the direction of tremendous licentious force; it was just that Burne’s face stayed in his memory and he was sick of the hysteria he was beginning to hear.

or that that stupid, overestimated Schiller is a demon in disguise?”

go to reap

the bitter harvest

turned over to a fresh page and began scrawling again.

shuddered when they found what Mr. Darwin was about, They shuddered when the waltz came in and Newman hurried out

sitting on the lid smiling serenely.

bent to hear you pray, You thanked him for your ‘glorious gains’—reproached him for ‘Cathay.’ ”

get more than a couplet at a time?

page torn out of his notebook.

the prison warder

haze of long evenings on the club veranda with the graphophone playing “Poor Butterfly” inside.

and all the latent evil that makes a crowd list and sway when he talks.

look on evil as evil, whether it’s clothed in filth or monotony or magnificence.

raked the universe over the coals for four years?

the slate roof

the rustling trees

broken voices for some long parting.

we’re breaking all the links that seemed to bind us here to top-booted and high-stocked generations.

the slate roofs

echoed in the stillness.

voices of freshman year surged around them and then they looked at each other with faint tears in their eyes.

a plaintive band

wait the twilight of the moon in this sequestered vale of star and spire, for one eternal morning of desire passes to time and earthy afternoon.

this sequestered vale

shadowed among the embers, furled in flame, the splendor and the sadness of the world.

a restive memory

if only to shriek the colossal stupidity of people.

the spluttering magic-lantern show

times when I think of the men out there as Roman legionaries, miles from their corrupt city, stemming back the hordes.

bleated triumphantly all through the Victorian era.

leave the blustering and tremulo-heroism to the middle classes; they do it so much better.

the blustering and tremulo-heroism

a frightful shock

and there will be “no small stir” when I get there.

honesty that all our sophistry cannot destroy and, above all, a childlike simplicity that keeps us from ever being really malicious.

all our sophistry

moved forward on the deck until he found a stool under an electric light.

poor gray-ribbed wrecks

linger on the windless decks, See on the spectre shore Shades of a thousand days, poor gray-ribbed wrecks.

the windless decks

gravelled light

a very sporty apartment

we are brought up to pile up a million and “show what we are made of.”

a few cleverly turned platitudes.

curiosity to know what queer corner of the world has swallowed Burne.

carnival of rich dusk and dim streets.

stepped into the sensuous vibrant walks of life.

and there would be more drunkenness than wine in the softness of her eyes on his.

loathed it as usual!

the bustling agency

quiver of a tear on his eyelid.

reproach yourself for what you can’t give me.

Intangibly fleeting, unrememberable hours

these hollow optimists

not the faintest recollection

was discoursing volubly on the war.

the bruised spots

insisted with owl-like wisdom.

inalleshual vacuity

physcal anmal

’bout ev’thing, women ’specially.

Los’ idealism

Now don’givadam

concluded by announcing to the bar at large that he was a “physcal anmal.”

two rye highballs

out of bed and ambled into the bathroom.

there followed an alcoholic dressing of several temperaments for the ordeal of dinner.

a play with two monotonous voices, with turbid, gloomy scenes

grew quite lucid and garrulous.

Amory rose and, approaching gallantly, introduced himself.

a lofty and exaggerated courtesy

a sleek waiter

set his mouth slightly ajar

several ingots of expression

a few stray pedestrians

undertone of anxiety.

and brought from his unplumbed depths tenderness that had surprised him, gentleness and unselfishness that he had never given to another creature.

his three weeks’ spree

Shaw’s aloof clarity

his rapt attention

a great devotee

expelling great quantities of breath into a little space.

the servants were so obtrusive that they had positively to be bumped out of the way, or even in the houses of more conservative “Union Club” families.

symmetrical restraint

the rancid accusations

a recumbent position

was because one was sitting in the lap of Montespan’s wraith

as Amory had once put it to a horrified matron.

congenial spirits

his beloved buses

then ridden abstractedly homeward atop one of his beloved buses.

more than bored; I am restless.”

a real old-fashioned bolt

this period when every nut is an individualist

the most individualistic pursuit

believe in leaders now, pitifully hard.

than the crosscurrents of criticism wash him away.

a blighted Shelley, changing, shifting, clever, unscrupulous, represent the critical consciousness of the race

too much scattered, illogical, ill-considered criticism

that particularly grasping, acquisitive form

a sudden inrush

a vulgar liaison

Tom was growing restless under this lampooning of his connection with The New Democracy.

a slim, utilitarian connection with economics

groggy with advertising.

his style and perspective are barbarous.

but at least they crowd their work instead of spreading it thin.

that double entente

dropped his arms until they swung loosely beside the chair and emitted faint grunts.

So that you may live If only as names, Sinuous, mauve-colored names, In the Juvenalia Of my collected editions.”

mauve-colored names

the iron pansy

this idiotic drivel

these long office tragedies that harp along on the significance of smoke

glancing at his wristwatch.

cheerful cripples

poignancy of that time.

in an hour of thaw and stars.

borne in upon a lull.

and the changeling city swooned

the changeling city

eerie half-laughter

something flows into us that enlarges our personalities, and when it ebbs out our personalities shrink

I should call your last two letters rather shrivelled.

marry in haste and repent at leisure

the present calamitous state

to sublet and shook hands gloomily in the Pennsylvania Station.

Desires that melted with the snow, and dreams begotten

a big, gloomy house

smiling complacency

the rain began to splatter down through the trees, become suddenly furtive and ghostly.

finally, through webs of twisted branches, caught sight of a rift in the trees where the unbroken lightning showed open country.

went on without a quaver.

a soaking haystack

A delighted shriek

the damp hair

looked eagerly at her who stood beside him on the soggy haystack

the soggy haystack

a slender figure

supposing she was forty and pedantic

overreaching light

and eyes that glittered green as emeralds in the blinding glare.

And nebulous lustre was born.

poked my eyes up over the hedge

wet hens always have great clarity of mind

my slicker and rubber boots

Why, you little wretch

descended from their perch.

they tiptoed across the fields, jumping and swinging from dry spot to dry spot.

came out of the fields and filled his way homeward.

the summer moths

mystic revery

he took a blade of grass and nibbled at it scientifically.

Spring in corsets!

Bind on thy sandals, oh, thou most fleet.

the warm balmy nights

revelled in their imaginations

the fireflies among dusky tree trunks

her throaty voice

The dream foregone

The dream foregone and the deed foreborne?”

the deed foreborne

a fleecy-headed drum

having quarrelled frantically with all her Baltimore relatives, and shocked them into fiery protest.

esprit that hinted strongly of the boulevards

from which Eleanor emerged, subdued but rebellious and indignant, to seek haven with her grandfather who hovered in the country on the near side of senility.

he shut his mind to all thoughts except those of hazy soap-bubble lands where the sun splattered through wind-drunk trees.

loll there on the edge of time while the flower months failed.

borne along a stream of love or fascination, or left in an eddy, and in the eddies he had not desired to think, rather to be picked up on a wave’s top and swept along again.

curious elfin love moods

dim phantasmal shapes

expressing eternal beauty in curious elfin love moods.

the trellised darkness

the belated traveller

while she revelled in the artificialities of the temperamental teens

when he pondered how coldly we thought of the “Dark Lady of the Sonnets,”

a long farewell trot

a bothersome branch

lonesome than the woods.

said, shuddering.

underbrush at night.

the rock-ribbed moonlight

broken by tiny glints in the swift water.

Rotten, rotten old world

the wretchedest thing

and you can lope about and get bored and then lope somewhere else

and you can play around with girls without being involved in meshes of sentiment

descend to their level and let them patronize my intellect

has any glimmer of what sex is.

one little soupçon

rather taken aback.

gabble about the sixth and ninth commandments.

scowling priests

illiterate Irish repentant

you’re too much the prig to admit it.

was riding breakneck for the end of the plateau.

nerves in a vast clangor.

she gave a sudden shriek and flung herself sideways, plunged from her horse 

a sudden shriek

a frantic whinny

went over with a frantic whinny.

bent forward on the pommel, sobbing bitterly.

went mad—stark raving crazy.

waned slowly with the moon.

Whispered to us of peace in the plaintive breeze

the plaintive breeze

the changing glade

the ghostly clover

stirred in your sleep.

lilt of the water.

waft her Sisters on.

Dim as a dream and wan with all old hours 

the eerie green

the splattered blouse

lulled by the everlasting surge of changing waves, smelling the half-mournful odor of the salt breeze.

whisper of Norse galleys ploughing the water world under raven-figured flags

gray bulwarks

face protruded from the driver’s seat.

Come on down, goopher!

some secluded nook

a wee jolt of bourbon

a gaudy, vermilion-lipped blonde

slept in the pavilions up in Asbury Park

These dreary fall days

left the car and sauntered back along the board walk to the hotel.

a deep, lethargic gulf

all desires had flown away and the gaps they left were filled only with the great listlessness of his disillusion.

bitter calomel

the rim of a moon seared the sky and made the curtains dim and ghostly.

a repeated muffled rapping.

lay there listening wretchedly to the knocking which had grown gradually to a pounding.

the gossamer aura

sacrifice should be eternally supercilious.

Weep not for me but for thy children.

tableau of anguish.

beckoned peremptorily to the girl.

were in the bathroom with the door bolted behind them.

a burly man

The aggrieved virtue

trying to look keen and ferret-like.

the handsome young man with his chin several points aloft

a few belated guests

the loudly dressed girl

asked Jill as they perched themselves on high stools inside

high stools

the dingy counter

a crisp, terse letter

no further remittances

a dazed Sunday night

combination of those inexplicable grooves and twists in his mind, that any discipline would curb it to mediocrity.

those inexplicable grooves

he loathed knowing that tomorrow and the thousand days after he would swell pompously at a compliment and sulk at an ill word like a third-rate musician or a first-class actor.

mental adventures from which he alone rebounded unscathed.

a startled baby

he heard a startled baby awake in a house across the street and lend a tiny whimper to the still night.

a tiny whimper

wondering with a touch of panic whether something in the brooding despair of his mood had made a darkness in its tiny soul.

the brooding despair

approached dim communion

an age-old dirge

that long chute

no longer ferreted out the deeper evils in pride and sensuality.

each had boasted of synchronizing what had gone before into his own rickety generalities

a human creature of sex and pride, foiled by chance and his own temperament of the balm of love and children

a night’s carouse

a belated taxi

the inexorable shears

a haunting grief

daft, staring faces

people with daft, staring faces, the most exalted seeming the most stricken.

who was large and begoggled and imposing.

speculating steadily but hopelessly some baffling hirsute problem.

some baffling hirsute problem

secondhand mannerisms

he continued rather testily.

lurched ponderously from the big man’s chest.

that road-mender

proffered them on his huge palm.

the best men would all flock for the other reward

A fierce hiss

beehive of corruption.

a sturdy, stolid opposition to all change.

a sturdy, stolid opposition

the last farthing

a huge hedge

the frostbitten country

flowers that, when closely inspected, appeared moth-eaten

Thou shalt not!

a dusky, dreamy smell

the yellowish moss

the muddled, unchastened world

the spirit of the past brooding over a new generation

go out into that dirty gray turmoil to follow love and pride

A good and virtuous nature may recoil In an imperial charge.

My dearest coz, I pray you, school yourself: but for your husband, He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows The fits o' the season.

The violence of either grief or joy Their own enactures with themselves destroy: Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament

Wherein the pained blood falters and goes out

Till then sit still, my soul: foul deeds will rise, Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s eyes.

Who's there, i' the name of Beelzebub?

to put him to his purgation would perhaps plunge him into far more choler.

The stag line is a most homogeneous mass of men.

Amory stepped inside and divested himself of cap and coat.

Let our just censures Attend the true event, and put we on Industrious soldiership.

What leered out of the dark in the ghostly clover?

an endless, incoherent dirge.

They pick up old, moth-eaten London accents

The Lord's anointed temple

in the sickly electric light of the paved hall.

in a fit of pique

All the materialists rampant

makes a crowd list and sway when he talks

That he is mad, ’tis true: ’tis true ’tis pity; And pity ’tis ’tis true: a foolish figure;

his mind was so crowded with dreams of athletic prowess

a rather tiresome prelude to the great adventure.

Whate'er thou art, for thy good caution, thanks

Thou hast harp'd my fear aright

Methinks it is like a weasel.

One woe doth tread

every one did bear Thy praises in his kingdom's great defence

Say to the king the knowledge of the broil as thou didst leave it.

after several astounding bracers.

Yet here she is allow’d her virgin crants, Her maiden strewments and the bringing home Of bell and burial.

What art thou that usurp’st this time of night

that dare look on that which might appal the devil.

Mine and my father’s death come not upon thee, nor thine on me!

Prithee, peace

Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric

The violins swelled and quavered on the last notes

cleaving the moonlight for haggard seconds

and then sauntered out to get some air.

Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky 

never learned to weep who sowed the bitter harvest that your children go to reap

And, for that purpose, I’ll anoint my sword.

the king’s jester.

a dusty piece of peanut brittle.

When Amory had the whooping-cough four disgusted specialists glared at each other hunched around his bed;

A worthy pioner!

A whole one, I. For thou dost know, O Damon dear, This realm dismantled was Of Jove himself

So they proceeded with an infinite guile that would have horrified her parents.

Horatio, thou art e’en as just a man As e’er my conversation coped withal.

But in the gross and scope of my opinion, this bodes some strange eruption to our state.

he never seemed to perspire.

This diamond he greets your wife withal, By the name of most kind hostess;

It is backed like a weasel.

Young fry of treachery!

Isabelle’s face was a study in enraptured curiosity.

To the selfsame tune and words.

Myra pictured an all-night tobacco debauch

Afterward they suppered on ginger ale and devil’s food in the pantry

I find thee apt

Thriftless ambition, that wilt ravin up Thine own life's means!

you speak like a green girl, Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.

The raven himself is hoarse that croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan

from their celluloid collars blossomed flaming orange ties.

I’m sure you would revel in it.

the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep?

Of all men else I have avoided thee: But get thee back; my soul is too much charged With blood of thine already.

Thou pray’st not well.

Wretched queen, adieu!

and the wretchedest thing of all is me

He was unaware that his failure to be cockney was ruining his standing.

They set off at a good gait, and for an hour swung along in a brisk argument

in his meed he’s unfellowed.

Amory heard an account of the ensuing conversation.

And, I believe, it is a fetch of wit: You laying these slight sullies on my son

dressing-room conversation culled from a slightly older set.

Amory knew that every time he had reached toward it longingly it had leered out at him with the grotesque face of evil.

pressed his hot forehead against the damp windowpane.

He fancied himself an athlete of possibilities and a supple dancer.

The time is out of joint

Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck, till thou applaud the deed.

thy face is valanced since I saw thee last

comest thou to beard me in Denmark?

Disdaining fortune, with his brandish'd steel

eyes that glittered green as emeralds in the blinding glare.

a dreary terror and made him unable to pray.

safe in a ditch he bides

With twenty trenched gashes on his head

Nor do we find him forward to be sounded, But, with a crafty madness, keeps aloof, 

finally bruised and weary

together they gilded the ceiling of Tom’s room

Why, let the stricken deer go weep, The hart ungalled play

something in the brooding despair of his mood

’tis an unweeded garden

’tis a knavish piece of work

usually aroused the jealous suspicions of the next borrower.

with his impatient superciliousness

she spoke of it as a sturdy, gallant feat.

my dull brain was wrought With things forgotten.

and it never failed to rouse in her the same feeling of resentment

Mackenzie, Chesterton, Galsworthy, Bennett, had sunk in his appreciation from sagacious, life-saturated geniuses to merely diverting contemporaries.

she maintained an enchantingly wavering attitude.

he came into actual cognizance of the family finances

flaring suits with huge peg-top trousers and gigantic padded shoulders.

In self-reproach and loneliness

For the first time in his life he rather longed for death to roll over his generation

Here’s the old jitney waiter.

they glided the silent roads about Princeton

Thou art the best o' the cut-throats

the only assimilative, traditionary bulwark against the decay of morals.

By the pricking of my thumbs, Something wicked this way comes.