sub_sentence
done, When the battle's lost and won.
Hover through the fog and filthy air.
the fog and filthy air
report, As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt The newest state.
a good and hardy soldier
knowledge of the broil As thou didst leave it.
cling together And choke their art.
two spent swimmers
villanies of nature Do swarm upon him—from the western isles Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied; And fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling, Show'd like a rebel's whore: but all's too weak: For brave Macbeth—well he deserves that name—
his damned quarrel
his brandish'd steel
carved out his passage Till he faced the slave;
valour's minion
bade farewell to him, Till he unseam'd him from the nave to the chaps, And fix'd his head upon our battlements.
direful thunders break
reflection Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break, So from that spring whence comfort seem'd to come Discomfort swells.
Shipwrecking storms
valour arm'd
the Norweyan lord surveying vantage
these skipping kerns
furbish'd arms
captains, Macbeth and Banquo?
hare the lion.
say sooth, I must report they were As cannons overcharged with double cracks, so they Doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe: Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds, Or memorise another Golgotha, I cannot tell.
thee as thy wounds; They smack of honour both.
What a haste
Whence camest thou
Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky And fan our people cold.
a dismal conflict
Confronted him with self-comparisons, Point against point rebellious, arm 'gainst arm.
his lavish spirit
disbursed at Saint Colme's inch Ten thousand dollars to our general use.
go pronounce his present death, And with his former title greet Macbeth.
Our bosom interest
Aroint thee, witch!
the rump-fed ronyon cries
rat without a tail, I'll do, I'll do, and I'll do.
Thou'rt kind
ports they blow, All the quarters that they know I' the shipman's card.
I' the shipman's card
dry as hay: Sleep shall neither night nor day Hang upon his pent-house lid; He shall live a man forbid:
Weary se'nnights
Yet it shall be tempest-tost.
hand in hand, Posters of the sea and land, Thus do go about, about: Thrice to thine and thrice to mine And thrice again, to make up nine.
the charm's wound
wild in their attire, That look not like the inhabitants o' the earth, And yet are on't?
You should be women, And yet your beards forbid me to interpret That you are so.
her chappy finger
hail, Macbeth, thou shalt be king hereafter!
sir, why do you start; and seem to fear Things that do sound so fair?
I' the name of truth, Are ye fantastical, or that indeed Which outwardly ye show?
Speak then to me, who neither beg nor fear Your favours nor your hate.
get kings, though thou be none: So all hail, Macbeth and Banquo!
The thane of Cawdor lives, A prosperous gentleman; and to be king Stands not within the prospect of belief, No more than to be Cawdor.
Why you stop our way With such prophetic greeting?
the insane root that takes the reason prisoner?
the selfsame tune
Macbeth, The news of thy success; and when he reads Thy personal venture in the rebels' fight, His wonders and his praises do contend Which should be thine or his: silenced with that,
the selfsame day
finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks, Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make, Strange images of death.
Nothing afeard
pour'd them down before him.
herald thee into his sight, Not pay thee.
earnest of a greater honour, He bade me, from him, call thee thane of Cawdor: In which addition, hail, most worthy thane!
his country's wreck
enkindle you unto the crown, Besides the thane of Cawdor.
Win us with honest trifles, to betray's In deepest consequence.
prologues to the swelling act Of the imperial theme.—I thank you, gentlemen.
I feel my heart knock at my ribs, Against the use of nature?
thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical, Shakes so my single state of man that function Is smother'd in surmise, and nothing is But what is not.
Think upon what hath chanced, and, at more time, The interim having weigh'd it, let us speak Our free hearts each to other.
a careless trifle
A deep repentance
twere a careless trifle.
hold thee to my heart.
My plenteous joys
eldest, Malcolm, whom we name hereafter The Prince of Cumberland; which honour must Not unaccompanied invest him only, But signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine On all deservers.
I'll be myself the harbinger and make joyful The hearing of my wife with your approach; So humbly take my leave.
fall down, or else o'erleap, For in my way it lies.
a peerless kinsman
wonder of it, came missives from the king, who all-hailed me 'Thane of Cawdor;' by which title, before, these weird sisters saluted me, and referred me to the coming on of time, with 'Hail, king that shalt be!'
deliver thee, my dearest partner of greatness, that thou mightst not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being ignorant of what greatness is promised thee.
Lay it to thy heart, and farewell.'
cries 'Thus thou must do, if thou have it; And that which rather thou dost fear to do Than wishest should be undone.'
chastise with the valour of my tongue All that impedes thee from the golden round,
metaphysical aid
were't
have inform'd for preparation.
direst cruelty
spirits That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here, And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full Of direst cruelty!
the dunnest smoke
pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell, That my keen knife see not the wound it makes, Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark, To cry 'Hold, hold!'
look like the innocent flower, But be the serpent under't.
shall to all our nights and days to come Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.
solely sovereign sway
his loved mansionry
his pendent bed and procreant cradle
The temple-haunting martlet
coign of vantage, but this bird Hath made his pendent bed and procreant cradle: Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed, The air is delicate.
no jutty, frieze
bid God 'ild us for your pains, And thank us for your trouble.
And the late dignities heap'd up to them, We rest your hermits.
make their audit at your highness' pleasure, Still to return your own.
his surcease success
if the assassination Could trammel up the consequence, and catch With his surcease success; that but this blow Might be the be-all and the end-all here, But here, upon this bank and shoal of time, We'ld jump the life to come.
our poison'd chalice
instructions, which, being taught, return To plague the inventor: this even-handed justice Commends the ingredients of our poison'd chalice To our own lips.
I a am his kinsman and his subject, Strong both against the deed; then, as his host, Who should against his murderer shut the door, Not bear the knife myself.
blow the horrid deed in every eye, That tears shall drown the wind.
the horrid deed
ambition, which o'erleaps itself And falls on the other.
only Vaulting ambition
almost supp'd
ask'd for me?
opinions from all sorts of people, Which would be worn now in their newest gloss, Not cast aside so soon.
thine own act
same in thine own act and valour As thou art in desire?
thine own esteem
Letting 'I dare not' wait upon 'I would,' Like the poor cat i' the adage?
Their drenched natures
his two chamberlains
when in swinish sleep
who shall bear the guilt Of our great quell?
thy undaunted mettle
As we shall make our griefs and clamour roar Upon his death?
fairest show: False face must hide what the false heart doth know.
And yet I would not sleep: merciful powers, Restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature Gives way to in repose!
A heavy summons
became the servant to defect; Which else should free have wrought.
your kind'st leisure
cleave to my consent, when 'tis, It shall make honour for you.
lose none In seeking to augment it, but still keep My bosom franchised and allegiance clear, I shall be counsell'd.
dudgeon gouts
The curtain'd sleep
his stealthy pace
Tarquin's ravishing strides
take the present horror from the time, Which now suits with it.
Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.
summons thee to heaven or to hell.
That which hath made them drunk hath made me bold; What hath quench'd them hath given me fire.
the fatal bellman, Which gives the stern'st good-night.
the surfeited grooms
mock their charge with snores: I have drugg'd their possets, That death and nature do contend about them, Whether they live or die.
sore labour's bath
the ravell'd sleeve
The king hath murder'd sleep, and therefore Cawdor Shall sleep no more; Macbeth shall sleep no more.'
unbend your noble strength, to think So brainsickly of things.
Go get some water, And wash this filthy witness from your hand.
this filthy witness
Infirm of purpose!
Like eye of childhood That fears a painted devil.
faces of the grooms withal; For it must seem their guilt.
knocking At the south entry: retire we to our chamber; A little water clears us of this deed: How easy is it, then!
constancy Hath left you unattended.
Get on your nightgown, lest occasion call us, And show us to be watchers.
twere best not know myself.
Wake Duncan with thy knocking!
enow about you; here you'll sweat for't.
who committed treason enough for God's sake, yet could not equivocate to heaven: O, come in, equivocator.
come hither, for stealing out of a French hose: come in, tailor; here you may roast your goose.
go the primrose way to the everlasting bonfire.
the primrose way
Anon, anon!
in conclusion, equivocates him in a sleep, and, giving him the lie, leaves him.
though he took up my legs sometime, yet I made a shift to cast him.
morrow, noble sir.
call timely on him: I have almost slipp'd the hour.
it may seem a joyful trouble to you; But yet 'tis one.
the woeful time
dire combustion
bird Clamour'd the livelong night: some say, the earth Was feverous and did shake.
The Lord's anointed temple
destroy your sight With a new Gorgon: do not bid me speak; See, and then speak yourselves.
the alarum-bell
As from your graves rise up, and walk like sprites, To countenance this horror!
Who calls to parley The sleepers of the house?
The repetition, in a woman's ear, Would murder as it fell.
Our royal master 's murder'd
Duff, I prithee, contradict thyself, And say it is not so.
the mere lees
All is but toys: renown and grace is dead; The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees Is left this vault to brag of.
The fountain of your blood Is stopp'd; the very source of it is stopp'd.
Those of his chamber, as it seem'd, had done 't: Their hands and faces were an badged with blood; So were their daggers, which unwiped we found Upon their pillows: They stared, and were distracted; no man's life Was to be trusted with them.
I repent me of my fury, That I did kill them.
how can one be wise, amazed, temperate and furious, Loyal and neutral, in a moment?
my violent love Outrun the pauser, reason.
look'd like a breach in nature For ruin's wasteful entrance: there, the murderers, Steep'd in the colours of their trade, their daggers Unmannerly breech'd with gore: who could refrain, That had a heart to love, and in that heart Courage to make 's love kno wn?
his gash'd stabs
an auger-hole
Hid in an auger-hole, may rush, and seize us?
suffer in exposure, let us meet, And question this most bloody piece of work, To know it further.
our naked frailties
keep us both the safer: where we are, There's daggers in men's smiles: the near in blood, The nearer bloody.
This murderous shaft
dainty of leave-taking, But shift away: there's warrant in that theft Which steals itself, when there's no mercy left.
remember well: Within the volume of which time I have seen Hours dreadful and things strange; but this sore night Hath trifled former knowings.
Why does the face of earth entomb, When living light should kiss it?
a mousing owl
falcon, towering in her pride of place, Was by a mousing owl hawk'd at and kill'd.
flung out, Contending 'gainst obedience, as they would make War with mankind.
bloody deed
Is't known who did this more than bloody deed?
Those that Macbeth hath slain.
Thriftless ambition
ambition, that wilt ravin up Thine own life's means!
The sacred storehouse
Will you to Scone?
I'll to Fife.
God's benison
As the weird women promised, and, I fear, Thou play'dst most foully for't: yet it was said It should not stand in thy posterity, But that myself should be the root and father Of many kings.
thy posterity
Thou play'dst most foully for't
borrower of the night For a dark hour or twain.
confessing Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers With strange invention: but of that to-morrow, When therewithal we shall have cause of state Craving us jointly.
Hie you
our time does call upon 's.
We'll keep ourself Till supper-time alone: while then, God be with you!
Sirrah, a word with you: attend those men Our pleasure?
Our fears in Banquo Stick deep; and in his royalty of nature Reigns that which would be fear'd: 'tis much he dares; And, to that dauntless temper of his mind, He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valour To act in safety.
that dauntless temper
Thence to be wrench'd with an unlineal hand, No son of mine succeeding.
a barren sceptre
For Banquo's sons have I filed my mind; For them the gracious Duncan have I murder'd; Put rancours in the vessel of my peace Only for them; and mine eternal jewel
champion me to the utterance!
consider'd of my speeches?
Is patience so predominant in your nature That you can let this go?
pray for this good man and for his issue, Whose heavy hand hath bow'd you to the grave And beggar'd yours for ever?
men, my liege.
which bounteous nature
As hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, curs, Shoughs, water-rugs and demi-wolves, are clept All by the name of dogs: the valued file Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle, The housekeeper, the hunter, every one According to the gift which bounteous nature Hath in him closed; whereby he does receive Particular addition.
Not i' the worst rank
that business, Whose execution takes your enemy off, Grapples you to the heart and love of us, Who wear our health but sickly in his life, Which in his death were perfect.
blows and buffets of the world
weary with disasters, tugg'd with fortune, That I would set my lie on any chance, To mend it, or be rid on't.
sweep him from my sight And bid my will avouch it, yet I must not, For certain friends that are both his and mine, Whose loves I may not drop, but wail his fall Who I myself struck down; and thence it is, That I to your assistance do make love, Masking the business from the common eye For sundry weighty reasons.
sundry weighty reasons
come to you anon.
call upon you straight: abide within.
thy soul's flight
'Tis safer to be that which we destroy Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy.
restless ecstasy
Ere we will eat our meal in fear and sleep In the affliction of these terrible dreams That shake us nightly: better be with the dead, Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace, Than on the torture of the mind to lie In restless ecstasy.
foreign levy
Treason has done his worst: nor steel, nor poison, Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing, Can touch him further.
life's fitful fever
your rugged looks
Gentle my lord, sleek o'er your rugged looks; Be bright and jovial among your guests to-night.
Present him eminence, both with eye and tongue:
lave our honours in these flattering streams, And make our faces vizards to our hearts, Disguising what they are.
night's yawning peal
black Hecate's summons
His cloister'd flight
The shard-borne beetle
ere to black Hecate's summons The shard-borne beetle with his drowsy hums Hath rung night's yawning peal, there shall be done A deed of dreadful note.
his drowsy hums
Makes wing to the rooky wood:
agents to their preys do rouse.
the lated traveller
note of expectation Already are i' the court.
sit down: at first And last the hearty welcome.
mingle with society, And play the humble host.
Be large in mirth; anon we'll drink a measure The table round.
Thou art the nonpareil.
As broad and general as the casing air: But now I am cabin'd, cribb'd, confined, bound in To saucy doubts and fears.
the casing air
twenty trenched gashes





















































worm that's fled Hath nature that in time will venom breed, No teeth for the present.
Sweet remembrancer
good digestion
our country's honour roof'd
the graced person
our Banquo present
challenge for unkindness Than pity for mischance!
Please't your highness To grace us with your royal company.
Thy gory locks
shake Thy gory locks at me.
passion: Feed, and regard him not.
look on that Which might appal the devil.
the air-drawn dagger
O, these flaws and starts, Impostors to true fear, would well become A woman's story at a winter's fire, Authorized by her grandam.
a winter's fire
A woman's story
look but on a stool.
canst nod, speak too.
be the maws of kites.
What, quite unmann'd in folly?
Fie, for shame!
Blood hath
rise again, With twenty mortal murders on their crowns, And push us from our stools: this is more strange Than such a murder is.
Ere human statute
twenty mortal murders
the gentle weal
a strange infirmity
infirmity, which is nothing To those that know me.
Banquo, whom we miss; Would he were here!
him, we thirst, And all to all.
glare with!
Think of this, good peers, But as a thing of custom: 'tis no other; Only it spoils the pleasure of the time.
the rugged Russian bear
the Hyrcan tiger
The arm'd rhinoceros
inhabit then, protest me The baby of a girl.
Unreal mockery
most admired disorder
broke the good meeting, With most admired disorder.
a summer's cloud
overcome us like a summer's cloud, Without our special wonder?
keep the natural ruby of your cheeks, When mine is blanched with fear.
Stand not upon the order of your going, But go at once.
The secret'st man
relations have By magot-pies and choughs and rooks brought forth The secret'st man of blood.
keep a servant fee'd.
am bent to know, By the worst means, the worst.
blood Stepp'd
give way: I am in blood Stepp'd in so far that, should I wade no more, Returning were as tedious as go o'er: Strange things I have in head, that will to hand; Which must be acted ere they may be scann'd.
fear that wants hard use: We are yet but young in deed.
the initiate fear
are, Saucy and overbold?
The close contriver
contriver of all harms, Was never call'd to bear my part, Or show the glory of our art?
a wayward son
been but for a wayward son, Spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do, Loves for his own ends, not for you.
Meet me i' the morning: thither he Will come to know his destiny: Your vessels and your spells provide, Your charms and every thing beside.
spend Unto a dismal and a fatal end:
such artificial sprites
a vaporous drop
magic sleights
hangs a vaporous drop profound; I'll catch it ere it come to ground: And that distill'd by magic sleights Shall raise such artificial sprites As by the strength of their illusion Shall draw him on to his confusion: He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear He hopes 'bove wisdom, grace and fear:
scorn death
bove wisdom
mortals' chiefest enemy
you all know, security Is mortals' chiefest enemy.
Sits in a foggy cloud, and stays for me.
a foggy cloud
thoughts, Which can interpret further: only, I say, Things have been strangely borne.
pitied of Macbeth: marry, he was dead: And the right-valiant Banquo walk'd too late; Whom, you may say, if't please you, Fleance kill'd, For Fleance fled: men must not walk too late.
The gracious Duncan
thought how monstrous It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain To kill their gracious father?
their gracious father
the two delinquents
pious rage
drink and thralls of sleep?
the men deny't
he Duncan's sons
twere to kill a father; so should Fleance.
the tyrant's feast
lives in disgrace: sir, can you tell Where he bestows himself?
the most pious Edward
faithful homage
free honours
gone to pray the holy king, upon his aid To wake Northumberland and warlike Siward: That, by the help of these—with Him above To ratify the work—we may again Give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights, Free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives, Do faithful homage and receive free honours: All which we pine for now: and this report Hath so exasperate the king that he Prepares for some attempt of war.
warlike Siward
Sent he to Macduff?
time That clogs me with this answer.'
an absolute 'Sir, not I
a swift blessing
court of England and unfold His message ere he come, that a swift blessing May soon return to this our suffering country Under a hand accursed!
the brinded cat
the hedge-pig
the cauldron go
Round about the cauldron go; In the poison'd entrails throw.
venom sleeping got, Boil thou first i' the charmed pot.
the charmed pot
thirty-one Swelter'd
Double, double toil
cauldron bubble
a hell-broth boil
tongue of dog, Adder's fork and blind-worm's sting, Lizard's leg and owlet's wing, For a charm of powerful trouble, Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.
blind-worm's sting
Lizard's leg
the cauldron boil
a fenny snake
tooth of wolf, Witches' mummy, maw and gulf Of the ravin'd salt-sea shark, Root of hemlock digg'd
the ravin'd salt-sea shark
the moon's eclipse
Nose of Turk and Tartar's lips, Finger of birth-strangled babe Ditch-deliver'd by a drab, Make the gruel thick and slab: Add thereto a tiger's chaudron,
birth-strangled babe Ditch-deliver'd
Tartar's lips
a tiger's chaudron
ingredients of our cauldron.
a baboon's blood
Cool it with a baboon's blood, Then the charm is firm and good.
the cauldron sing
Live elves
elves and fairies in a ring, Enchanting all that you put in.
pricking of my thumbs, Something wicked this way comes.
locks, Whoever knocks!
deed without a name.
the yesty waves
their warders' heads
bladed corn
nature's germens tumble
lodged and trees blown down; Though castles topple on their warders' heads; Though palaces and pyramids do slope Their heads to their foundations; though the treasure Of nature's germens tumble all together, Even till destruction sicken; answer me To what I ask you.
Her nine farrow
sow's blood
the murderer's gibbet
Pour in sow's blood, that hath eaten Her nine farrow; grease that's sweaten From the murderer's gibbet throw Into the flame.
thane of Fife.
thou art, for thy good caution, thanks; Thou hast harp'd my fear aright: but one word more,—
potent than the first.
power of man, for none of woman born Shall harm Macbeth.
Macduff: what need I fear of thee?
pale-hearted fear
spite of thunder.
top of sovereignty?
his baby-brow
high Dunsinane hill
chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are: Macbeth shall never vanquish'd be until Great Birnam wood to high Dunsinane hill Shall come against him.
Great Birnam wood
bid the tree Unfix his earth-bound root?
Sweet bodements
rise, and our high-placed Macbeth Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath To time and mortal custom.
mortal custom
Rebellion's head
our high-placed Macbeth
Reign in this kingdom?
an eternal curse
Come like shadows, so depart!
spirit of Banquo: down!
other gold-bound brow
Filthy hags
some I see That two-fold balls and treble scepters carry: Horrible sight!
treble scepters
the blood-bolter'd Banquo
cheer we up his sprites, And show the best of our delights: I'll charm the air to give a sound, While you perform your antic round: That this great king may kindly say, Our duties did his welcome pay.
your antic round
accursed in the calendar!
your grace's will
whereon they ride; And damn'd all those that trust them!
the air whereon
galloping of horse: who was't came by?
fled to England.
Fled to England!
be The firstlings of my hand.
my dread exploits
The flighty purpose
The very firstlings
crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and done: The castle of Macduff I will surprise; Seize upon Fife; give to the edge o' the sword
trace him in his line.
all unfortunate souls
boasting like a fool; This deed I'll do before this purpose cool.
no more sights!—Where
patience, madam.
make us traitors.
the poor wren
ones in her nest, against the owl.
wisdom, where the flight So runs against all reason.
pray you, school yourself: but for your husband, He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows The fits o' the season.
a wild and violent sea
times, when we are traitors And do not know ourselves, when we hold rumour From what we fear, yet know not what we fear, But float upon a wild and violent sea Each way and move.
Things at the worst will cease, or else climb upward To what they were before.
Blessing upon you!
My pretty cousin
take my leave at once.
Sirrah, your father's dead; And what will you do now?
speak'st with all thy wit: and yet, i' faith, With wit enough for thee.
traitor, mother?
one that swears and lies.
traitors that do so?
one that does so is a traitor, and must be hanged.
they all be hanged that swear and lie?
liars and swearers enow to beat the honest men and hang up them.
sign that I should quickly have a new father.
Poor prattler
prattler, how thou talk'st!
state of honour I am perfect.
found here; hence, with your little ones.
a homely man's advice
am too savage; To do worse to you were fell cruelty, Which is too nigh your person.
this earthly world
that womanly defence
put up that womanly defence, To say I have done no harm?
hope, in no place so unsanctified Where such as thou mayst find him.
thou shag-hair'd villain!
shag-hair'd villain
fry of treachery!
Young fry
some desolate shade
Weep our sad bosoms empty.
our sad bosoms
felt with Scotland and yell'd out Like syllable of dolour.
each new morn New widows
our down-fall'n birthdom
the mortal sword
new orphans
believe, and what I can redress, As I shall find the time to friend, I will.
be so perchance.
tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues, Was once thought honest: you have loved him well.
offer up a weak poor innocent lamb To appease an angry god.
a weak poor innocent lamb
recoil In an imperial charge.
A good and virtuous nature
That which you are my thoughts cannot transpose: Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell; Though all things foul would wear the brows of grace, Yet grace must still look so.
Perchance even there where I did find my doubts.
those strong knots
Why in that rawness left you wife and child, Those precious motives, those strong knots of love, Without leave-taking?
Those precious motives
be rightly just, Whatever I shall think.
Bleed, bleed, poor country
Great tyranny
cheque thee: wear thou thy wrongs; The title is affeer'd!
be the villain that thou think'st For the whole space that's in the tyrant's grasp, And the rich East to boot.
the tyrant's grasp
gracious England
the tyrant's head
goodly thousands
more sundry ways
offer Of goodly thousands: but, for all this, When I shall tread upon the tyrant's head, Or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country Shall have more vices than it had before, More suffer and more sundry ways than ever, By him that shall succeed.
black Macbeth
seem as pure as snow, and the poor state Esteem him as a lamb, being compared With my confineless harms.
horrid hell
legions Of horrid hell can come a devil more damn'd
top Macbeth
In evils to top Macbeth.
better Macbeth
All continent impediments
sin That has a name: but there's no bottom, none, In my voluptuousness: your wives, your daughters, Your matrons and your maids, could not fill up The cistern of my lust, and my desire All continent impediments would o'erbear That did oppose my will: better Macbeth Than such an one to reign.
Boundless intemperance
The untimely emptying
the happy throne
a spacious plenty
time you may so hoodwink.
be That vulture in you, to devour so many As will to greatness dedicate themselves, Finding it so inclined.
such A stanchless avarice
my most ill-composed affection
this other's house
grows In my most ill-composed affection such A stanchless avarice that, were I king, I should cut off the nobles for their lands, Desire his jewels and this other's house:
our slain kings
sword of our slain kings: yet do not fear; Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will.
summer-seeming lust
more pernicious root
other graces weigh'd
are portable, With other graces weigh'd.
relish of them, but abound In the division of each several crime,
Pour the sweet milk of concord into hell, Uproar the universal peace, confound All unity on earth.
Uproar the universal peace
an untitled tyrant
his own interdiction
issue of thy throne By his own interdiction stands accursed, And does blaspheme his breed?
thy wholesome days
queen that bore thee, Oftener upon her knees than on her feet, Died every day she lived.
a most sainted king
Have banish'd me from Scotland.
the black scruples
reconciled my thoughts To thy good truth and honour.
win me Into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me From over-credulous haste: but God above Deal between thee and me!
modest wisdom
over-credulous haste
Devilish Macbeth
For strangers to my nature.
Unspeak mine own detraction
ten thousand warlike men
speaking Was this upon myself: what I am truly, Is thine and my poor country's to command: Whither indeed, before thy here-approach, Old Siward, with ten thousand warlike men, Already at a point, was setting forth.
Be like our warranted quarrel!
our warranted quarrel
things at once 'Tis hard to reconcile.
Such welcome and unwelcome things
The great assay
Such sanctity
wretched souls
work in this good king; Which often, since my here-remain in England, I have seen him do.
A most miraculous work
The mere despair
strangely-visited people
The healing benediction
people, All swoln and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye, The mere despair of surgery, he cures, Hanging a golden stamp about their necks, Put on with holy prayers: and 'tis spoken, To the succeeding royalty he leaves The healing benediction.
sundry blessings
a heavenly gift
hath a heavenly gift of prophecy, And sundry blessings hang about his throne, That speak him full of grace.
My ever-gentle cousin
Alas, poor country!
ask'd for who; and good men's lives Expire before the flowers in their caps, Dying or ere they sicken.
good men's lives
scarce ask'd
the dead man's knell
A modern ecstasy
violent sorrow
the newest grief
an hour's age
That of an hour's age doth hiss the speaker: Each minute teems a new one.
has not batter'd at their peace?
niggard of your speech: how goes't?
But not a niggard
fellows that were out; Which was to my belief witness'd the rather, For that I saw the tyrant's power a-foot: Now is the time of help; your eye in Scotland Would create soldiers, make our women fight, To doff their dire distresses.
their dire distresses
the tyrant's power
gracious England hath
comfort We are coming thither: gracious England hath Lent us good Siward and ten thousand men; An older and a better soldier none That Christendom gives out.
good Siward
words That would be howl'd out in the desert air, Where hearing should not latch them.
is it a fee-grief Due to some single breast?
a fee-grief
Pertains to you alone.
be mine, Keep it not from me, quickly let me have it.
despise my tongue for ever, Which shall possess them with the heaviest sound That ever yet they heard.
quarry of these murder'd deer, To add the death of you.
these murder'd deer
Merciful heaven
the o'er-fraught heart
sorrow words
grief that does not speak Whispers the o'er-fraught heart and bids it break.
be from thence!
medicines of our great revenge, To cure this deadly grief.
this deadly grief
O hell-kite
Fell slaughter on their souls.
their own demerits
whetstone of your sword: let grief Convert to anger; blunt not the heart, enrage it.
braggart with my tongue!
heavens, Cut short all intermission; front to front Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself; Within my sword's length set him; if he 'scape, Heaven forgive him too!
my sword's length
is ready; Our lack is nothing but our leave; Macbeth Is ripe for shaking, and the powers above Put on their instruments.
watched with you, but can perceive no truth in your report.
her night-gown
rise from her bed, throw her night-gown upon her, unlock her closet, take forth paper, fold it, write upon't, read it, afterwards seal it, and again return to bed; yet all this while in a most fast sleep.
A great perturbation
benefit of sleep, and do the effects of watching!
this slumbery agitation
may to me: and 'tis most meet you should.
witness to confirm my speech.
has light by her continually; 'tis her command.
rubs her hands.
an accustomed action
comes from her, to satisfy my remembrance the more strongly.
time to do't.—Hell is murky!—Fie, my lord, fie! a soldier, and afeard?
tis time
call our power to account?—Yet who would have thought the old man to have had so much blood in him.
that, my lord, no more o' that: you mar all with this starting.
sure of that: heaven knows what she has known.
smell of the blood still: all the perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little hand.
What a sigh
dignity of the whole body.
died holily in their beds.
tell you yet again, Banquo's buried; he cannot come out on's grave.
unnatural deeds
unnatural troubles
Foul whisperings
means of all annoyance, And still keep eyes upon her.
burn in them; for their dear causes Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm Excite the mortified man.
the mortified man
the grim alarm
many unrough youths
Siward's son
first of manhood.
all the gentry
his distemper'd cause
valiant fury
Hang loose about him, like a giant's robe Upon a dwarfish thief.
a dwarfish thief
a giant's robe
is within him does condemn Itself for being there?
obedience where 'tis truly owed:
our country's purge
the sickly weal
medicine of the sickly weal, And with him pour we in our country's purge Each drop of us.
needs, To dew the sovereign flower and drown the weeds.
the sovereign flower
march towards Birnam.
Birnam wood
taint with fear.
boy Malcolm?
All mortal consequences
man that's born of woman Shall e'er have power upon thee.'
the English epicures
, false thanes
devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon!
cream-faced loon
Geese, villain!
Go prick thy face, and over-red thy fear, Thou lily-liver'd boy.
counsellors to fear.
those linen cheeks
push Will cheer me ever, or disseat me now.
troops of friends, I must not look to have; but, in their stead, Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honour, breath, Which the poor heart would fain deny, and dare not.
your gracious pleasure
confirm'd, my lord, which was reported.
fight till from my bones my flesh be hack'd.
those that talk of fear.
mine armour
sick, my lord, As she is troubled with thick coming fancies, That keep her from her rest.
some sweet oblivious antidote
the stuff'd bosom
Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow, Raze out the written troubles of the brain And with some sweet oblivious antidote Cleanse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous stuff Which weighs upon the heart?
a rooted sorrow
that perilous stuff
purge it to a sound and pristine health, I would applaud thee to the very echo, That should applaud again.—Pull't off, I say.— What rhubarb, cyme, or what purgative drug, Would scour these English hence?
what purgative drug
a sound and pristine health
come to Dunsinane.
Birnam forest
wood of Birnam.
hew him down a bough And bear't before him: thereby shall we shadow The numbers of our host and make discovery Err in report of us.
Keeps still in Dunsinane, and will endure Our setting down before 't.
the confident tyrant
advantage to be given, Both more and less have given him the revolt, And none serve with him but constrained things Whose hearts are absent too.
constrained things
Industrious soldiership
put we on Industrious soldiership.
our just censures
make us know What we shall say we have and what we owe.
their unsure hopes
speculative their unsure hopes relate, But certain issue strokes must arbitrate: Towards which advance the war.
the outward walls
our castle's strength
Hang out our banners on the outward walls; The cry is still 'They come:' our castle's strength Will laugh a siege to scorn: here let them lie Till famine and the ague eat them up: Were they not forced with those that should be ours, We might have met them dareful, beard to beard, And beat them backward home.
my slaughterous thoughts
familiar to my slaughterous thoughts Cannot once start me.
a night-shriek
the last syllable
dusty death
all our yesterdays
syllable of recorded time, And all our yesterdays have lighted fools The way to dusty death.
this petty pace
frets his hour upon the stage
full of sound and fury, Signifying nothing.
Thou comest
comest to use thy tongue; thy story quickly.
see it coming; I say, a moving grove.
care not if thou dost for me as much.
equivocation of the fiend That lies like truth: 'Fear not, till Birnam wood Do come to Dunsinane:' and now a wood Comes toward Dunsinane.
this which he avouches does appear, There is nor flying hence nor tarrying here.
aweary of the sun, And wish the estate o' the world were now undone.
die with harness on our back.
your leafy screens
worthy Macduff
You, worthy uncle, Shall, with my cousin, your right-noble son, Lead our first battle: worthy Macduff and we Shall take upon 's what else remains to do, According to our order.
give them all breath, Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.
Those clamorous harbingers
all our trumpets
thou call'st thyself a hotter name Than any is in hell.
My name's Macbeth
devil himself could not pronounce a title More hateful to mine ear.
abhorred tyrant
prove the lie thou speak'st.
Thou wast
swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn,
's of a woman born.
be'st slain and with no stroke of mine, My wife and children's ghosts will haunt me still.
children's ghosts
wretched kerns
strike at wretched kerns, whose arms Are hired to bear their staves: either thou, Macbeth, Or else my sword with an unbatter'd edge I sheathe again undeeded.
an unbatter'd edge
one of greatest note Seems bruited.
this great clatter
The tyrant's people
The noble thanes
do bravely in the war; The day almost itself professes yours, And little is to do.
the castle's gently render'd
met with foes That strike beside us.
charged With blood of thine already.
thou bloodier villain Than terms can give thee out!
bloodier villain
losest labour
the intrenchant air
a charmed life
fall thy blade on vulnerable crests; I bear a charmed life, which must not yield, To one of woman born.
Untimely ripp'd
his mother's womb
was from his mother's womb Untimely ripp'd.
keep the word of promise to our ear, And break it to our hope.
these juggling fiends
are, Painted on a pole, and underwrit, 'Here may you see the tyrant.'
the rabble's curse
young Malcolm's feet
kiss the ground before young Malcolm's feet, And to be baited with the rabble's curse.
throw my warlike shield.
my warlike shield
Lay on, Macduff, And damn'd be him that first cries, 'Hold, enough!'
great a day as this is cheaply bought.
station where he fought, But like a man he died.
a soldier's debt
the unshrinking station
his prowess confirm'd
cause of sorrow Must not be measured by his worth, for then It hath no end.
Ay, on the front.
God's soldier
Had I as many sons as I have hairs, I would not wish them to a fairer death: And so, his knell is knoll'd.
Hail, king!
thee compass'd
thy kingdom's pearl
The usurper's cursed head
expense of time Before we reckon with your several loves, And make us even with you.
first that ever Scotland In such an honour named.
such an honour
his fiend-like queen
watchful tyranny
'tis thought
this dead butcher
our exiled friends
the cruel ministers
by self and violent hands Took off her life; this, and what needful else That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace, We will perform in measure, time and place:
thanks to all at once and to each one, Whom we invite to see us crown'd at Scone.
thanks: ’tis bitter cold, And I am sick at heart.
bitter cold
Not a mouse stirring
rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.
And liegemen
liegemen to the Dane.
O, farewell, honest soldier
soldier: Who hath relieved you?
Holla! Bernardo
good Marcellus
Horatio: welcome, good Marcellus.
appear’d again to-night?
this dreaded sight
take hold of him Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us: Therefore I have entreated him along With us to watch the minutes of this night; That if again this apparition come, He may approve our eyes and speak to it.
Tush, tush
When yond same star
like the king that’s dead.
speak to it, Horatio.
harrows me with fear and wonder.
time of night, Together with that fair and warlike form In which the majesty of buried Denmark Did sometimes march?
buried Denmark
that fair and warlike form
stalks away!
How now, Horatio
the sensible and true avouch
believe Without the sensible and true avouch Of mine own eyes.
the sledded Polacks
the very armour
the ambitious Norway
was the very armour he had on When he the ambitious Norway combated; So frown’d he once, when, in an angry parle, He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice. ’
an angry parle
martial stalk
jump at this dead hour, With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.
gross and scope of my opinion, This bodes some strange eruption to our state.
some strange eruption
this sweaty haste
the night joint-labourer
brazen cannon
Why this same strict and most observant watch
whose sore task
cast of brazen cannon, And foreign mart for implements of war; Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task Does not divide the Sunday from the week; What might be toward, that this sweaty haste Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day: Who is’t that can inform me?
king, Whose image even but now appear’d to us, Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
inheritance of Fortinbras, Had he been vanquisher; as, by the same covenant, And carriage of the article design’d, His fell to Hamlet.
the article design’d
the same covenant
our valiant Hamlet
a most emulate pride
head Of this post-haste and romage in the land.
young Fortinbras
unimproved mettle
the main motive
lawless resolutes
those foresaid lands
this portentous figure
the mind’s eye
mote it is to trouble the mind’s eye.
the most high and palmy state
the mightiest Julius
gibber in the Roman streets:
Neptune’s empire
the moist star
fierce events
trains of fire and dews of blood, Disasters in the sun; and the moist star Upon whose influence Neptune’s empire stands Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse: And even the like precurse of fierce events, As harbingers preceding still the fates And prologue to the omen coming on, Have heaven and earth together demonstrated Unto our climatures and countrymen.
even the like precurse
hast any sound, or use of voice, Speak to me: If there be any good thing to be done, That may to thee do ease and grace to me, Speak to me: (Cock crows.)
privy to thy country’s fate, Which, happily, foreknowing may avoid, O, speak!
thy country’s fate
womb of earth, For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death, Speak of it: stay, and speak!
strike at it with my partisan?
do it wrong, being so majestical, To offer it the show of violence; For it is, as the air, invulnerable, And our vain blows malicious mockery.
malicious mockery
a fearful summons
started like a guilty thing Upon a fearful summons.
his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
The extravagant and erring spirit hies
in sea or fire, in earth or air, The extravagant and erring spirit hies To his confine: and of the truth herein This present object made probation.
crowing of the cock.
our Saviour’s birth
bird of dawning singeth all night long: And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad; The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike, No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
russet mantle
young Hamlet
dumb to us, will speak to him.
high eastward hill
acquaint him with it, As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
pray; and I this morning know Where we shall find him most conveniently.
so far hath discretion
our dear brother’s death
wisest sorrow
contracted in one brow of woe, Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature That we with wisest sorrow think on him, Together with remembrance of ourselves.
one brow
The imperial jointress
jointress to this warlike state, Have we, as ’twere with a defeated joy— With an auspicious and a dropping eye, With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage, In equal scale weighing delight and dole— Taken to wife: nor have we herein barr’d Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone With this affair along.
this warlike state
our sometime sister
our most valiant brother
a weak supposal
our late dear brother’s death
bonds of law, To our most valiant brother.
good Cornelius
here writ
Out of his subject: and we here dispatch You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltimand, For bearers of this greeting to old Norway; Giving to you no further personal power To business with the king, more than the scope Of these delated articles allow.
His further gait
these delated articles
this his nephew’s purpose
(Exeunt Voltimand
And now, Laertes
told us of some suit; what is’t, Laertes?
speak of reason to the Dane, And lose your voice: what wouldst thou beg, Laertes, That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
throne of Denmark to thy father.
, Laertes
your gracious leave
bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.
last Upon his will I seal’d my hard consent: I do beseech you, give him leave to go.
laboursome petition
spend it at thy will!
But now, my cousin Hamlet
more than kin, and less than kind.
look like a friend on Denmark.
thy nighted colour
for ever with thy vailed lids Seek for thy noble father in the dust:
thy vailed lids
Passing through nature to eternity.
shapes of grief, That can denote me truly: these indeed seem, For they are actions that a man might play: But I have that within which passeth show; These but the trappings and the suits of woe.
the fruitful river
customary suits
solemn black
windy suspiration
filial obligation
impious stubbornness
we in our peevish opposition Take it to heart?
our peevish opposition
any the most vulgar thing
unmanly grief
these mourning duties
obstinate condolement
obsequious sorrow
the first corse
death of fathers, and who still hath cried, From the first corse till he that died to-day, “This must be so.”
no less nobility
are the most immediate to our throne; And with no less nobility of love Than that which dearest father bears his son, Do I impart toward you.
dearest father
This unprevailing woe
going back to school in Wittenberg, It is most retrograde to our desire:
remain Here, in the cheer and comfort of our eye, Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.
prayers, Hamlet: I pray thee, stay with us; go not to Wittenberg.
obey you, madam.
Be as ourself in Denmark.
Re-speaking earthly thunder
This gentle and unforced accord
, No jocund health
whereof, No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day, But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell, And the king’s rouse the heavens shall bruit again, Re-speaking earthly thunder.
all but Hamlet.)
resolve itself into a dew!
canon ’gainst self-slaughter!
Fie on’t
ah fie! ’tis
an unweeded garden
excellent a king; that was, to this, Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother That he might not beteem the winds of heaven Visit her face too roughly.
grown By what it fed on: and yet, within a month— Let me not think on’t—Frailty, thy name is woman!—
body, Like Niobe,
my poor father’s body
most unrighteous tears
her galled eyes
My father’s brother
uncle, My father’s brother, but no more like my father Than I to Hercules: within a month: Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears Had left the flushing in her galled eyes, She married.
incestuous sheets
post With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
such dexterity
Hail to your lordship!
your poor servant
same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.
make you from Wittenberg, Horatio? Marcellus?
make you from Wittenberg?
A truant disposition
truster of your own report Against yourself: I know you are no truant.
affair in Elsinore?
your father’s funeral
came to see your father’s funeral.
my mother’s wedding
lord, it follow’d hard upon.
thrift, Horatio!
Thrift, thrift
the funeral baked meats
met my dearest foe in heaven Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!
my dearest foe
eye, Horatio.
my mind’s eye
a goodly king
take him for all in all, I shall not look upon his like again.
an attent ear
witness of these gentlemen, This marvel to you.
God’s love
middle of the night, Been thus encounter’d.
he walk’d By their oppress’d and fear-surprised eyes, Within his truncheon’s length; whilst they, distill’d Almost to jelly with the act of fear, Stand dumb and speak not to him.
his truncheon’s length
dreadful secrecy
I with them the third night kept the watch: Where, as they had deliver’d, both in time, Form of the thing, each word made true and good, The apparition comes: I knew your father; These hands are not more like.
lord, upon the platform where we watch’d.
vanish’d from our sight.
Arm’d, my lord.
look’d he
countenance more in sorrow than in anger.
fix’d his eyes upon you?
moderate haste
one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.
A sable silver’d
was, as I have seen it in his life, A sable silver’d.
watch to-night; Perchance ’twill walk again.
speak to it, though hell itself should gape And bid me hold my peace.
my noble father’s person
hitherto conceal’d this sight, Let it be tenable in your silence still; And whatsoever else shall hap to-night, Give it an understanding, but no tongue: I will requite your loves.
duty to your honour.
loves, as mine to you: farewell.
My father’s spirit
foul deeds
men’s eyes
rise, Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s eyes.
give benefit And convoy is assistant, do not sleep, But let me hear from you.
perfume and suppliance of a minute; No more.
primy nature
wide withal
The inward service
service of the mind and soul Grows wide withal.
do, Carve for himself; for on his choice depends The safety and health of this whole state; And therefore must his choice be circumscribed Unto the voice and yielding of that body Whereof he is the head.
unvalued persons
his saying deed
he in his particular act and place May give his saying deed; which is no further Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
your chaste treasure
open To his unmaster’d importunity.
his unmaster’d importunity
too credent ear
the morn and liquid dew
The chariest maid
galls the infants of the spring, Too oft before their buttons be disclosed, And in the morn and liquid dew of youth Contagious blastments are most imminent.
youth Contagious blastments
watchman to my heart.
the steep and thorny way
a puff’d and reckless libertine
the primrose path
his own rede
some ungracious pastors
Whiles, like a puff’d and reckless libertine, Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads, And recks not his own rede.
dalliance treads
A double blessing
Laertes! aboard, aboard, for shame!
Yet here, Laertes
stay’d for.
blessing with thee!
precepts in thy memory See thou character.
these few precepts
Grapple them to thy soul with hoops of steel; But do not dull thy palm with entertainment Of each new-hatch’d, unfledged comrade.
each new-hatch’d, unfledged comrade
Beware Of entrance to a quarrel, but being in, Bear’t that the opposed may beware of thee.
each man’s censure
Costly thy habit
But not express’d
a most select and generous chief
they in France of the best rank and station Are of a most select and generous chief in that.
loses both itself and friend, And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
Neither a borrower
thine ownself be true, And it must follow, as the night the day, Thou canst not then be false to any man.
Farewell, Ophelia; and remember well What I have said to you.
Tis in my memory lock’d, And you yourself shall keep the key of it.
my memory lock’d
the Lord Hamlet
something touching the Lord Hamlet.
Have of your audience been most free and bounteous:
tell you, You do not understand yourself so clearly As it behoves my daughter and your honour.
tenders Of his affection to me.
speak like a green girl, Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
such perilous circumstance
teach you: think yourself a baby; That you have ta’en these tenders for true pay, Which are not sterling.
importuned me with love In honourable fashion.
honourable fashion
vows of heaven.
almost all the holy vows
extinct in both, Even in their promise, as it is a-making, You must not take for fire.
rate Than a command to parley.
Breathing like sanctified and pious bonds, The better to beguile.
sanctified and pious bonds
a larger tether
, Ophelia
unholy suits
is for all: I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth, Have you so slander any moment leisure, As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
an eager air
season Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
flourish of trumpets, and ordnance shot off, within.)
(A flourish
The kettle-drum
wake to-night and takes his rouse, Keeps wassail, and the swaggering up-spring reels; And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down, The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out The triumph of his pledge.
the swaggering up-spring reels
manner born, it is a custom More honour’d in the breach than the observance.
a custom More honour’d
swinish phrase Soil
takes From our achievements, though perform’d at height, The pith and marrow of our attribute.
us drunkards
plausive manners
his own scandal
nature’s livery
one defect
the general censure
some vicious mole
pure as grace, As infinite as man may undergo— Shall in the general censure take corruption From that particular fault: the dram of eale Doth all the noble substance of a doubt To his own scandal.
thee airs
airs from heaven or blasts from hell, Be thy intents wicked or charitable,
goblin damn’d
such a questionable shape
comest in such a questionable shape That I will speak to thee: I’ll call thee Hamlet, King, father, royal Dane: O, answer me!
Why thy canonized bones
his ponderous and marble jaws
oped his ponderous and marble jaws, To cast thee up again.
complete steel Revisit’st
glimpses of the moon, Making night hideous; and we fools of nature So horridly to shake our disposition With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
dead corse
beckons you to go away with it, As if it some impartment did desire To you alone.
a pin’s fee
do to that, Being a thing immortal as itself?
the dreadful summit
so many fathoms
more motive
brain That looks so many fathoms to the sea And hears it roar beneath.
hardy as the Nemean lion’s nerve.
the Nemean lion’s nerve
each petty artery
(Exeunt Ghost
fit thus to obey him.
Alas, poor ghost
lend thy serious hearing To what I shall unfold.
thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.
Doom’d for a certain term to walk the night, And for the day confined to fast in fires, Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature Are burnt and purged away.
thy father’s spirit
this eternal blazon
knotted and combined locks
quills upon the fretful porpentine: But this eternal blazon must not be To ears of flesh and blood.
the fretful porpentine
his foul and most unnatural murder
is; But this most foul, strange and unnatural.
sweep to my revenge.
be than the fat weed That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf, Wouldst thou not stir in this.
Lethe wharf
thy father’s life
my death Rankly
process of my death Rankly abused: but know, thou noble youth, The serpent that did sting thy father’s life Now wears his crown.
O my prophetic soul
O Hamlet
my most seeming-virtuous queen
seduce!—won to his shameful lust The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen: O Hamlet, what a falling-off was there!
his shameful lust
traitorous gifts
decline Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor To those of mine!
a radiant angel
a celestial bed
moved, Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven, So lust, though to a radiant angel link’d, Will sate itself in a celestial bed, And prey on garbage.
eager droppings
such an enmity
porches of my ears did pour The leperous distilment; whose effect Holds such an enmity with blood of man That swift as quicksilver it courses through The natural gates and alleys of the body, And with a sudden vigour doth posset And curd, like eager droppings into milk, The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine; And a most instant tetter bark’d about, Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust, All my smooth body.
a most instant tetter
a sudden vigour
cursed hebenon
The leperous distilment
The thin and wholesome blood
vile and loathsome crust
a brother’s hand
sent to my account With all my imperfections on my head: O, horrible!
all my imperfections
bed of Denmark be A couch for luxury and damned incest.
leave her to heaven And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge, To prick and sting her.
her bosom lodge
gins to pale his uneffectual fire:
his uneffectual fire
O, fie! Hold
you, my sinews, grow not instant old, But bear me stiffly up.
holds a seat In this distracted globe.
this distracted globe
forms, all pressures past, That youth and observation copied there; And thy commandment all alone shall live Within the book and volume of my brain, Unmix’d with baser matter: yes, by heaven!
all trivial fond records
baser matter
O most pernicious woman
O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain
I’m sure it may be so in Denmark: (Writing.)
Adieu, adieu!
Hillo, ho, ho, my lord!
Hillo, ho, ho, boy! come, bird, come.
is’t, my noble lord?
How is’t
dwelling in all Denmark
a villain dwelling
an arrant knave
hold it fit that we shake hands and part: You, as your business and desire shall point you; For every man has business and desire, Such as it is; and for mine own poor part, Look you, I’ll go pray.
more circumstance
wild and whirling words
offence, my lord.
much offence
is an honest ghost, that let me tell you: For your desire to know what is between us, O’ermaster’t as you may.
lord, not I.
hear this fellow in the cellarage— Consent to swear.
oath, my lord.
Swear by my sword.
Hic et ubique
lay your hands again upon my sword: Never to speak of this that you have heard, Swear by my sword.
A worthy pioner
things in heaven and earth, Horatio, Than are dreamt of in your philosophy.
help you mercy, How strange or odd soe’er
an antic disposition
some doubtful phrase
help you, Swear.
, perturbed spirit
friending to you, God willing, shall not lack.
fingers on your lips, I pray.
out of joint: O cursed spite, That ever I was born to set it right!
O cursed spite
visit him, to make inquire Of his behavior.
Take you, as ’twere, some distant knowledge of him;
mark this, Reynaldo?
slips As are companions noted and most known To youth and liberty.
a fiery mind
unreclaimed blood
savageness in unreclaimed blood, Of general assault.
fetch of wit: You laying these slight sullies on my son, As ’twere a thing a little
these slight sullies
According to the phrase or the addition Of man and country.
soil’d i
the prenominate crimes
something: where did I leave?
o’ertook in’s rouse; There falling out at tennis:” or perchance, “I saw him enter such a house of sale
Videlicet, a brothel, or so forth.
,” Videlicet
Observe his inclination in yourself.
(Exit Reynaldo
How now, Ophelia
foul’d, Ungarter’d, and down-gyved to his ankle; Pale as his shirt; his knees knocking each other; And with a look so piteous in purport As if he had been loosed out of hell To speak of horrors—he comes before me.
took me by the wrist and held me hard; Then goes he to the length of all his arm; And, with his other hand thus o’er his brow, He falls to such perusal of my face As he would draw it.
such perusal
his shoulder turn’d
raised a sigh so piteous and profound As it did seem to shatter all his bulk And end his being: that done, he lets me go: And, with his head over his shoulder turn’d, He seem’d to find his way without his eyes; For out o’ doors he went without their helps, And, to the last, bended their light on me.
Whose violent property fordoes
the very ecstasy
oft as any passion under heaven That does afflict our natures.
did command, I did repel his letters and denied His access to me.
better heed
fear’d he did but trifle, And meant to wreck thee; but, beshrew my jealousy!
cast beyond ourselves in our opinions As it is common for the younger sort To lack discretion.
More grief
utter love
hide than hate to utter love.
Our hasty sending
we much did long to see you, The need we have to use you did provoke Our hasty sending.
Hamlet’s transformation
the inward man
heard Of Hamlet’s transformation; so call it, Sith nor the exterior nor the inward man Resembles that it was.
his father’s death
sith so neighbour’d
, open’d
as from occasion you may glean, Whether aught, to us unknown, afflicts him thus, That, open’d, lies within our remedy.
much talk’d
expend your time with us awhile, For the supply and profit of our hope, Your visitation shall receive such thanks As fits a king’s remembrance.
a king’s remembrance
so much gentry
Than to entreaty.
Both your majesties
the sovereign power
we both obey, And here give up ourselves, in the full bent To lay our service freely at your feet, To be commanded.
gentle Guildenstern
My too much changed son
gentlemen where Hamlet is.
(Exeunt Rosencrantz
ambassadors from Norway, my good lord, Are joyfully return’d.
Hamlet’s lunacy
my good liege
my gracious king
hold my duty, as I hold my soul, Both to my God and to my gracious king: And I do think, or else this brain of mine Hunts not the trail of policy so sure As it hath used to do, that I have found The very cause of Hamlet’s lunacy.
that great feast
be the fruit to that great feast.
first admittance
(Exit Polonius
all your son’s distemper
head and source of all your son’s distemper.
our o’erhasty marriage
His father’s death
His nephew’s levies
vow before his uncle never more To give the assay of arms against your majesty.
overcome with joy, Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee, And his commission to employ those soldiers, So levied as before, against the Polack: With an entreaty, (Giving a paper.)
Whereon old Norway
give quiet pass Through your dominions for this enterprise, On such regards of safety and allowance As therein are set down.
our more consider’d time
Go to your rest; at night we’ll feast together: Most welcome home!
nothing but to waste night, day and time.
outward flourishes
is the soul of wit, And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes, I will be brief: your noble son is mad: Mad call I it; for, to define true madness, What is’t but to be nothing else but mad?
tis ’tis
true ’tis pity
farewell it, for I will use no art.
a foolish figure
cause of this defect, For this effect defective comes by cause: Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.
have a daughter—have while she is mine— Who, in her duty and obedience, mark, Hath given me this: now gather, and surmise.
my soul’s idol
the most beautified Ophelia
idol, the most beautified Ophelia,”—
phrase, a vile phrase; “beautified” is a vile phrase: but you shall hear.
a vile phrase
bosom, these, etc.”
her excellent white bosom
Came this from Hamlet to her?
Good madam
am ill at these numbers; I have not art to reckon my groans: but that I love thee best, O most best, believe it.
evermore most dear lady
him, Hamlet.”
hath his solicitings, As they fell out by time, by means and place, All given to mine ear.
how hath
As of a man faithful and honourable.
majesty your queen here, think, If I had play’d the desk or table-book, Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb, Or look’d upon this love with idle sight; What might you think?
then I precepts
lock herself from his resort, Admit no messengers, receive no tokens.
into a fast, Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness, Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension, Into the madness wherein now he raves, And all we mourn for.
know that— That I have positively said “ ’Tis so,” When it proved otherwise?
Take this from this, if this be otherwise: If circumstances lead me, I will find Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed Within the centre.
assistant for a state, But keep a farm and carters.
the poor wretch
(Exeunt King
King, Queen, and Attendants.)
my good Lord Hamlet
goes, is to be one man picked out of ten thousand.
breed maggots in a dead dog, being a god kissing carrion—Have you a daughter?
a god kissing carrion
is a blessing: but not as your daughter may conceive.
knew me not at first; he said I was a fishmonger: he is far gone, far gone: and truly in my youth I suffered much extremity for love; very near this.
much extremity
a plentiful lack
grey beards
thick amber and plum-tree gum
am, if like a crab you could go backward.
the satirical rogue
be madness, yet there is method in’t.
happiness that often madness hits on, which reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of.
honourable lord
take from me any thing that I will more willingly part withal: except my life, except my life, except my life.
These tedious old fools
go to seek the Lord Hamlet; there he is.
My honoured lord
Good lads
lads, how do ye both?
the indifferent children
fortune’s cap
live about her waist, or in the middle of her favours?
None, my lord, but that the world’s grown honest.
sends you to prison hither?
Denmark’s a prison
many confines
one; in which there are many confines, wards and dungeons, Denmark being one o’
king of infinite space, were it not that I have bad dreams.
a shadow’s shadow
quality that it is but a shadow’s shadow.
monarchs and outstretched heroes the beggars’ shadows.
our beggars bodies
outstretched heroes
the beggars’ shadows
make you at Elsinore?
too dear a halfpenny
Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; but I thank you: and sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny.
a free visitation
deal justly with me: come, come; nay, speak.
kind of confession in your looks which your modesties have not craft enough to colour: I know the good king and queen have sent for you.
a better proposer
be even and direct with me, whether you were sent for, or no?
eye of you.—If you love me, hold not off.
secrecy to the king and queen moult no feather.
a foul and pestilent congregation
this majestical roof
this goodly frame
this most excellent canopy
a sterile promontory
this brave o’erhanging firmament
all my mirth
roof fretted with golden fire, why, it appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours.
paragon of animals!
quintessence of dust?
coming, to offer you service.
what lenten entertainment
the adventurous knight
the humourous man
tribute of me; the adventurous knight shall use his foil and target; the lover shall not sigh gratis; the humourous man shall end his part in peace; the clown shall make those laugh whose lungs are tickled o’ the sere; and the lady shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall halt for’t.
those you were wont to take delight in, the tragedians of the city.
comes by the means of the late innovation.
estimation they did when I was in the city?
the wonted pace
many wearing rapiers
little eyases
afraid of goose-quills and dare scarce come thither.
so berattle
do them wrong, to make them exclaim against their own succession?
their own succession
tarre them to controversy: there was, for a while, no money bid for argument, unless the poet and the player went to cuffs in the question.
lord; Hercules and his load too.
an hundred ducats
give twenty, forty, fifty, an hundred ducats a-piece for his picture in little. ’
Flourish of trumpets within.)
welcome to Elsinore.
players, which, I tell you, must show fairly outward, should more appear like entertainment than yours.
my uncle-father and aunt-mother
am but mad north-north-west: when the wind is southerly I know a hawk from a handsaw.
his swaddling-clouts
baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling-clouts.
tell me of the players; mark it.
Buz, buz!
mine honour
pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral, tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable
actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral, tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or poem unlimited: Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor Plautus too light.
O Jephthah
Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou!
, old Jephthah
right, old Jephthah?
daughter that I love passing well.
Nay, that follows not.
As by lot, God wot,”
row of the pious chanson will show you more; for look, where my abridgement comes.
the pious chanson
thou to beard me in Denmark?
altitude of a chopine.
By’r lady
uncurrent gold
apiece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the ring.
fly at any thing we see: we’ll have a speech straight: come, give us a taste of your quality; come, a passionate speech.
French falconers
as much modesty
pleased not the million; ’twas caviare to the general: but it was—as I received it, and others, whose judgments in such matters cried in the top of mine—an excellent play, well digested in the scenes, set down with as much modesty as cunning.
phrase that might indict the author of affectation; but called it an honest method, as wholesome as sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine.
The rugged Pyrrhus
Priam’s slaughter
the Hyrcanian beast
thereabout of it especially, where he speaks of Priam’s slaughter: if it live in your memory, begin at this line: let me see, let me see— “The rugged Pyrrhus, like the Hyrcanian beast,”—
Aeneas’ tale
a tyrannous and damned light
the ominous horse
now this dread
couched in the ominous horse, Hath now this dread and black complexion smear’d With heraldry more dismal; head to foot Now is he total gules; horridly trick’d With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, Baked and impasted with the parching streets, That lend a tyrannous and damned light To their lord’s murder: roasted in wrath and fire, And thus o’er-sized with coagulate gore, With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus Old grandsire Priam seeks.”
their lord’s murder
— “The rugged Pyrrhus
whose sable arms
the hellish Pyrrhus Old grandsire
the parching streets
black complexion
God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good discretion.
’Fore God
unequal match’d
The unnerved father
lies where it falls, Repugnant to command: unequal match’d, Pyrrhus at Priam drives; in rage strikes wide; But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword The unnerved father falls.
Then senseless Ilium
flaming top Stoops
a hideous crash
prisoner Pyrrhus
Ilium, Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash Takes prisoner Pyrrhus’ ear: for, lo!
declining on the milky head Of reverend Priam, seem’d i’ the air to stick:
reverend Priam
the milky head
stood, And like a neutral to his will and matter, Did nothing.
a painted tyrant
anon the dreadful thunder
Aroused vengeance
the Cyclops’ hammers
less remorse
orb below As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder Doth rend the region, so, after Pyrrhus’ pause, Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work; And never did the Cyclops’ hammers fall On Mars’s armour forged for proof eterne With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword Now falls on Priam.
Mars’s armour
Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword
Pyrrhus’ pause
strumpet, Fortune!
take away her power; Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel, And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven, As low as to the fiends!”
the round nave
general synod
shall to the barber’s, with your beard.
tale of bawdry, or he sleeps: say on: come to Hecuba.
the mobled queen
O, who had seen the mobled queen—”
“The mobled queen
“mobled queen
Gainst Fortune’s state
venom steep’d
her husband’s limbs
malicious sport
seen, with tongue in venom steep’d, ’Gainst Fortune’s state would treason have pronounced: But if the gods themselves did see her then When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport In mincing with his sword her husband’s limbs, The instant burst of clamour that she made, Unless things mortal move them not at all, Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven, And passion in the gods.”
turned his colour and has tears in’s eyes.
see the players well bestowed?
were better have a bad epitaph than their ill report while you live.
the abstract and brief chronicles
a bad epitaph
use them according to their desert.
God’s bodykins
use every man after his desert, and who should ’scape whipping?
less they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty.
your own honour
hear a play to-morrow.
Polonius with all the Players but the First.)
me, old friend; can you play the Murder of Gonzago?
lines, which I would set down and insert in’t, could you not?
some dozen or sixteen lines
drift of circumstance, Get from him why he puts on this confusion, Grating so harshly all his days of quiet With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?
so harshly all his days
turbulent and dangerous lunacy
confession Of his true state.
a crafty madness
Niggard of question; but, of our demands, Most free in his reply.
assay him To any pastime?
players We o’er-raught on the way: of these we told him; And there did seem in him a kind of joy To hear of it: they are about the court, And, as I think, they have already order This night to play before him.
entreat your majesties To hear and see the matter.
doth much content me To hear him so inclined.
drive his purpose on to these delights.
lawful espials
Ophelia: Her father and myself, lawful espials, Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing, unseen, We may of their encounter frankly judge, And gather by him, as he is behaved, If’t be the affliction of his love or no
his wonted way
Hamlet’s wildness
bring him to his wonted way again, To both your honours.
both your honours
bestow ourselves.
show of such an exercise may colour Your loneliness.
blame in this— ’Tis too much proved—that with devotion’s visage And pious action we do sugar o’er
sugar o’er
pious action
devotion’s visage
O, ’tis
lash that speech doth give my conscience!
O heavy burthen
The harlot’s cheek
thing that helps it Than is my deed to my most painted word: O heavy burthen!
’tis nobler
outrageous fortune
nobler in the mind to suffer The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune, Or to take arms against a sea of troubles, And by opposing end them?
The heart-ache
die: to sleep; No more; and by a sleep to say we end The heart-ache and the thousand natural shocks That flesh is heir to, ’tis a consummation Devoutly to be wish’d.
this mortal coil
come When we have shuffled off this mortal coil, Must give us pause: there’s the respect That makes calamity of so long life;
the proud man’s contumely
despised love
the unworthy takes
a bare bodkin
make With a bare bodkin?
the law’s delay
The undiscover’d country
dread of something after death, The undiscover’d country from whose bourn No traveller returns, puzzles the will And makes us rather bear those ills we have Than fly to others that we know not of?
a weary life
the native hue
Is sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought, And enterprises of great pitch and moment With this regard their currents turn awry, And lose the name of action.—Soft you now!
The fair Ophelia
Be all my sins remember’d.)
honour for this many a day?
remembrances of yours, That I have longed long to re-deliver; I pray you, now receive them.
for to the noble mind Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
admit no discourse to your beauty.
commerce than with honesty?
is to a bawd than the force of honesty can translate beauty into his likeness: this was sometime a paradox, but now the time gives it proof.
inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of it: I loved you not.
Get thee to a nunnery: why wouldst thou be a breeder of sinners?
more offences
imagination to give them shape, or time to act them in.
crawling between earth and heaven?
arrant knaves
Go thy ways to a nunnery.
shut upon him, that he may play the fool nowhere but in’s own house.
thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape calumny.
Get thee to a nunnery, go: farewell.
O heavenly powers
nick-name God’s creatures
heard of your paintings too, well enough; God has given you one face, and you make yourselves another: you jig, you amble, and you lisp, and nick-name God’s creatures, and make your wantonness your ignorance.
Go to, I’ll no more on’t; it hath made me mad.
observed of all observers, quite, quite down!
most deject
honey of his music vows, Now see that noble and most sovereign reason, Like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh; That unmatch’d form and feature of blown youth Blasted with ecstasy: O, woe is me, To have seen what I have seen, see what I see!
that noble and most sovereign reason
his music vows
That unmatch’d form
Haply the seas
expel This something-settled matter in his heart, Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus From fashion of himself.
our neglected tribute
believe The origin and commencement of his grief Sprung from neglected love.
neglected love
his grief Sprung
hold it fit, after the play Let his queen mother all alone entreat him To show his grief: let her be round with him; And I’ll be placed, so please you, in the ear Of all their conference.
find him not, To England send him, or confine him where Your wisdom best shall think.
Madness in great ones must not unwatch’d go.
the town-crier
many of your players do, I had as lief the town-crier spoke my lines.
the very torrent
whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness.
capable of nothing but inexplicable dumbshows and noise: I would have such a fellow whipped for o’erdoing Termagant; it out-herods Herod: pray you, avoid it.
very rags
inexplicable dumbshows
out-herods Herod
o’erdoing Termagant
a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear
this special observance
is from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at the first and now, was and is, to hold, as ’twere, the mirror up to nature; to show virtue her own feature, scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time his form and pressure.
come tardy off, though it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve; the censure of the which one must in your allowance o’erweigh a whole theatre of others.
Now this overdone
the unskilful laugh
nature’s journeymen
players that I have seen play, and heard others praise, and that highly, not to speak it profanely, that, neither having the accent of Christians nor the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and bellowed that I have thought some of nature’s journeymen had made men and not made them well, they imitated humanity so abominably.
reformed that indifferently with us, sir.
barren spectators
set down for them; for there be of them that will themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators to laugh too; though, in the mean time, some necessary question of the play be then to be considered: that’s villainous, and shows a most pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it.
a most pitiful ambition
(Exeunt Players
art e’en
thou art e’en as just a man As e’er my conversation coped withal.
hope from thee That no revenue hast but thy good spirits, To feed and clothe thee?
the candied tongue
the pregnant hinges
knee Where thrift may follow fawning.
absurd pomp
fortune’s buffets
hast been As one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing, A man that fortune’s buffets and rewards Hast ta’en with equal thanks: and blest are those Whose blood and judgment are so well commingled, That they are not a pipe for fortune’s finger To sound what stop she please.
fortune’s finger
wear him In my heart’s core, ay, in my heart of heart, As I do thee.—Something too much of this.—
passion’s slave
my heart’s core
his occulted guilt
my father’s death
a damned ghost
thou seest that act afoot, Even with the very comment of thy soul Observe mine uncle: if his occulted guilt Do not itself unkennel in one speech, It is a damned ghost that we have seen, And my imaginations are as foul As Vulcan’s stithy.
heedful note
censure of his seeming.
’scape detecting
steal aught the whilst this play is playing, And ’scape detecting, I will pay the theft.
coming to the play; I must be idle: Get you a place.
cousin Hamlet?
faith; of the chameleon’s dish: I eat the air, promise-crammed: you cannot feed capons so.
the chameleon’s dish
answer, Hamlet; these words are not mine.
i’ the Capitol; Brutus killed me.
part of him to kill so capital a calf there.
a brute part
stay upon your patience.
mother, here’s metal more attractive.
Ophelia’s feet
Lying down at Ophelia’s feet.)
maids’ legs
thought to lie between maids’ legs.
God, your only jig-maker.
your only jig-maker
look you, how cheerfully my mother looks, and my father died within these two hours.
Nay, ’tis twice two months, my lord.
have a suit of sables.
thinking on, with the hobby-horse, whose epitaph is “For, O, for, O, the hobby-horse is forgot.”
a great man’s memory
, by’r lady
miching mallecho; it means mischief.
know by this fellow: the players cannot keep counsel; they’ll tell all.
beg your hearing patiently.
posy of a ring?
’Tis brief
woman’s love
Phoebus’ cart
round Neptune’s salt wash
moons with borrow’d sheen About the world have times twelve thirties been Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands Unite commutual in most sacred bands.
’ orbed ground
ere love
far from cheer and from your former state, That I distrust you.
distrust, Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must: For women’s fear and love holds quantity;
women’s fear
neither aught
is so: Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear; Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.
let me be accurst!
Wormwood, wormwood.
none of love: A second time I kill my husband dead, When second husband kisses me in bed.
pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt: What to ourselves in passion we propose, The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
Most necessary ’tis
Their own enactures
slender accident
either grief
grieves, on slender accident.
Grief joys
should with our fortunes change; For ’tis a question left us yet to prove, Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love.
love on fortune tend; For who not needs shall never lack a friend, And who in want a hollow friend doth try, Directly seasons him his enemy.
die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.
Sport and repose lock
An anchor’s cheer
cheer in prison be my scope!
face of joy Meet what I would have well and it destroy!
lasting strife
The tedious day
beguile The tedious day with sleep.
come mischance between us twain!
Madam, how like you this play?
poison in jest; no offence i’ the world.
the duke’s name
piece of work: but what o’ that?
a knavish piece
the galled jade wince
we that have free souls, it touches us not: let the galled jade wince, our withers are unwrung.
one Lucianus
nephew to the king.
see the puppets dallying.
groaning to take off my edge.
thy damnable faces
murderer; pox, leave thy damnable faces, and begin.
bellow for revenge.”
the croaking raven
wholesome life
dire property
usurp immediately.
Hecate’s ban
the sleeper’s ears
Pours the poison into the sleeper’s ears.)
i’ the garden for’s estate.
writ in choice
Gonzago’s wife
love of Gonzago’s wife.
frighted with false fire!
all but Hamlet and Horatio.)
The hart ungalled play
the stricken deer
sleep: So runs the world away.
rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me—with two Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players, sir?
my razed shoes
was Of Jove himself; and now reigns here A very, very—pajock.
A very, very—pajock
the ghost’s word
take the ghost’s word for a thousand pound.
talk of the poisoning?
king like not the comedy, Why then, belike, he likes it not, perdy.
Is in his retirement marvellous distempered.
lord, rather with choler.
far more choler
put him to his purgation would perhaps plunge him into far more choler.
wildly from my affair.
sir: pronounce.
most great affliction
please you to make me a wholesome answer, I will do your mother’s commandment: if not, your pardon and my return shall be the end of my business.
your mother’s commandment
’s diseased: but, sir, such answer as I can make, you shall command; or, rather, as you say, my mother: therefore no more, but to the matter: my mother, you say—
struck her into amazement and admiration.
son, that can so astonish a mother!
this mother’s admiration
heels of this mother’s admiration?
cause of distemper?
deny your griefs to your friend.
voice of the king himself for your succession in Denmark?
withdraw with you:)—why do you go about to recover the wind of me, as if you would drive me into a toil?
be too bold, my love is too unmannerly.
most eloquent music
give it breath with your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent music.
command to any utterance of harmony; I have not the skill.
music, excellent voice, in this little organ; yet cannot you make it speak. ’
played on than a pipe?
yonder cloud
tis like a camel, indeed.
is like a weasel.
backed like a weasel.
fool me to the top of my bent.)
Letters, my lord, from Hamlet: This to your majesty; this to the queen.
received them Of him that brought them.
beg leave to see your kingly eyes: when I shall, first asking your pardon thereunto, recount the occasion of my sudden and more strange return.
your kingly eyes
my sudden and more strange return
’Tis Hamlet’s character
the very sickness
tell him to his teeth, “Thus didest thou.”
be so, Laertes— As how should it be so?
o’errule me to a peace.
thine own peace
breathe, But even his mother shall uncharge the practice And call it accident.
devise it so That I might be the organ.
such envy
Hamlet’s hearing
the unworthiest siege
that in Hamlet’s hearing, for a quality Wherein, they say, you shine: your sum of parts Did not together pluck such envy from him As did that one, and that, in my regard, Of the unworthiest siege.
cap of youth, Yet needful too; for youth no less becomes The light and careless livery that it wears Than settled age his sables and his weeds, Importing health and graveness.
The light and careless livery
Come short of what he did.
such wondrous doing
life, Lamond.
especial, That he cried out, ’twould be a sight indeed, If one could match you: the scrimers of their nation, He swore, had had neither motion, guard, nor eye, If you opposed them.
such a masterly report
his Did Hamlet
Your sudden coming o’er
are you like the painting of a sorrow, A face without a heart?
passages of proof, Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
a like goodness
lives within the very flame of love A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it; And nothing is at a like goodness still;
a spendthrift sigh
your father’s son
undertake, To show yourself your father’s son in deed More than in words?
, good Laertes
sword unbated, and in a pass of practice Requite him for your father.
a little shuffling
a double varnish
anoint my sword.
gall him slightly, It may be death.
Twere better not assay’d: therefore this project Should have a back or second, that might hold, If this should blast in proof.
a solemn wager
make a solemn wager on your cunnings: I ha’t.
drown’d, Laertes.
One woe
another’s heel
your sister’s drown’d
the glassy stream
our cold maids
dead men’s fingers
her coronet weeds
fantastic garlands
the weeping brook
leaves in the glassy stream; There with fantastic garlands did she come Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples That liberal shepherds give a grosser name, But our cold maids do dead men’s fingers call them: There, on the pendent boughs her coronet weeds Clambering to hang, an envious sliver broke; When down her weedy trophies and herself Fell in the weeping brook.
the pendent boughs
an envious sliver
her weedy trophies
her own distress
snatches of old tunes; As one incapable of her own distress, Or like a creature native and indued Unto that element: but long it could not be Till that her garments, heavy with their drink, Pull’d the poor wretch from her melodious lay To muddy death.
muddy death
her melodious lay
Drown’d, drown’d.
much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia, And therefore I forbid my tears: but yet It is our trick; nature her custom holds, Let shame say what it will: when these are gone, The woman will be out.
speech of fire, that fain would blaze, But that this folly douts it.
do to calm his rage!
burial that wilfully seeks her own salvation?
Christian burial
sat on her, and finds it Christian burial.
drowned herself in her own defence?
se offendendo
lies the point: if I drown myself wittingly, it argues an act: and an act hath three branches; it is, to act, to do, to perform: argal, she drowned herself wittingly.
you, goodman delver—
shortens not his own life.
is’t; crowner’s quest law.
Ay, marry, is’t
crowner’s quest law
been a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o’ Christian burial.
’ Christian burial
the more pity
have countenance in this world to drown or hang themselves, more than their even Christian.
Adam’s profession
confess thyself—
stronger than either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?
The gallows-maker
outlives a thousand tenants.
those that do ill: now thou dost ill to say the gallows is built stronger than the church: argal, the gallows may do well to thee.
mason, a shipwright, or a carpenter?”
more about it, for your dull ass will not mend his pace with beating; and, when you are asked this question next, say “a grave-maker:” the houses that he makes last till doomsday.
your dull ass
get thee to Yaughan: fetch me a stoup of liquor.
(Exit Second Clown
was very sweet, To contract, O, the time, for, ah, my behove, O, methought, there was nothing meet.
Custom hath
property of easiness.
the daintier sense
’Tis e’en
hand of little employment hath the daintier sense.
shipped me intil the land, As if I had never been such.
jowls it to the ground, as if it were Cain’s jaw-bone, that did the first murder!
Cain’s jaw-bone
pate of a politician, which this ass now o’er-reaches; one that would circumvent God, might it not?
Or of a courtier; which could say “Good morrow, sweet lord!
“Good morrow
my lord such-a-one’s horse
lord such-a-one, that praised my lord such-a-one’s horse, when he meant to beg it; might it not?
knocked about the mazzard with a sexton’s spade: here’s fine revolution, an we had the trick to see’t.
a sexton’s spade
play at loggats with ’em?
ache to think on’t.
mine ache
spade, a spade,
A pick-axe
a shrouding sheet
skull of a lawyer?
, his quillets
a dirty shovel
this rude knave
fine of his fines, and the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full of fine dirt?
his fine pate
his double vouchers
length and breadth of a pair of indentures?
The very conveyances
inheritor himself have no more, ha?
made of sheepskins?
Ay, my lord, and of calf-skins too.
sheep and calves which seek out assurance in that.
made For such a guest is meet.
lie in’t, and yet it is mine.
lie in’t, to be in’t and say it is thine: ’tis for the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou liest.
lie, sir; ’twill away again, from me to you.
woman, sir; but, rest her soul, she’s dead.
speak by the card, or equivocation will undo us.
note of it; the age is grown so picked that the toe of the peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, he galls his kibe.
king Hamlet overcame Fortinbras.
was mad: he shall recover his wits there; or, if he do not, it’s no great matter there.
e’en with losing his wits.
sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.
many pocky corses
hold the laying in—he will last you some eight year or nine year: a tanner will last you nine year.
a sore decayer
your whoreson dead body
tanned with his trade, that he will keep out water a great while; and your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead body.
lain in the earth three and twenty years.
A whoreson mad fellow
a mad rogue
pestilence on him for a mad rogue!
poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once.
skull, sir, was Yorick’s skull, the king’s jester.
the king’s jester
This same skull
Yorick’s skull
lips that I have kissed I know not how oft.
set the table on a roar?
your own grinning
let her paint an inch thick, to this favour she must come; make her laugh at that.
my lady’s chamber
Prithee, Horatio, tell me one thing.
return, Horatio!
a bung-hole
trace the noble dust of Alexander, till he find it stopping a bung-hole?
Twere to consider too curiously, to consider so.
faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither with modesty enough, and likelihood to lead it: as thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander returneth into dust; the dust is earth; of earth we make loam; and why of that loam, whereto he was converted, might they not stop a beer-barrel?
the winter flaw
kept the world in awe, Should patch a wall to expel the winter flaw!
Imperious Caesar
queen, the courtiers: who is this they follow?
such maimed rites
did with desperate hand Fordo its own life: ’twas of some estate.
desperate hand Fordo
the last trumpet
Her maiden strewments
crants, Her maiden strewments and the bringing home Of bell and burial.
allow’d her virgin crants
sing a requiem and such rest to her As to peace-parted souls.
her fair and unpolluted flesh
thee, churlish priest, A ministering angel shall my sister be, When thou liest howling.
churlish priest
, the fair Ophelia
Sweets to the sweet: farewell!
deck’d, sweet maid, And not have strew’d thy grave.
my Hamlet’s wife
sweet maid
treble woe
that cursed head
thy most ingenious sense
Whose wicked deed
caught her once more in mine arms: (Leaps into the grave.)
the skyish head
old Pelion
pile your dust upon the quick and dead, Till of this flat a mountain you have made, To o’ertop old Pelion, or the skyish head Of blue Olympus.
the wandering stars
stand Like wonder-wounded hearers?
wonder-wounded hearers
I, Hamlet the Dane.
Leaps into the grave.)
Grappling with him.)
Thou pray’st
am not splenitive and rash, Yet have I something in me dangerous, Which let thy wiseness fear: hold off thy hand.
come out of the grave.)
mad, Laertes
love of God, forbear him.
I’ll do’t.
come here to whine?
outface me with leaping in her grave?
prate of mountains, let them throw Millions of acres on us, till our ground, Singeing his pate against the burning zone, Make Ossa like a wart!
Nay, an thou’lt mouth, I’ll rant as well as thou.
an thou’lt mouth
the female dove
work on him; Anon, as patient as the female dove, When that her golden couplets are disclosed, His silence will sit drooping.
her golden couplets
Hercules himself do what he may, The cat will mew and dog will have his day.
good Horatio
(Exit Horatio
our last night’s speech
put the matter to the present push.
Good Gertrude
have a living monument: An hour of quiet shortly shall we see; Till then, in patience our proceeding be.
a living monument
much for this, sir: now shall you see the other; You do remember all the circumstance?
all the circumstance
Worse than the mutines in the bilboes.
serves us well, When our deep plots do pall: and that should teach us There’s a divinity that shapes our ends, Rough-hew them how we will—
withdrew To mine own room again; making so bold,
O royal knavery!—an exact command
Denmark’s health
commission; where I found, Horatio— O royal knavery!—an exact command, Larded with many several sorts of reasons Importing Denmark’s health and England’s too, With, ho! such bugs and goblins in my life, That, on the supervise, no leisure bated, No, not to stay the grinding of the axe, My head should be struck off.
baseness to write fair and labour’d much How to forget that learning, but, sir, now It did me yeoman’s service: wilt thou know The effect of what I wrote?
me yeoman’s service
many such-like “As”es
her wheaten garland
knowing of these contents, Without debatement further, more or less, He should the bearers put to sudden death, Not shriving-time allow’d.
An earnest conjuration
his faithful tributary
a comma ’tween
heaven ordinant
was heaven ordinant.
my father’s signet
had my father’s signet in my purse, Which was the model of that Danish seal; Folded the writ up in form of the other, Subscribed it, gave’t the impression, placed it safely, The changeling never known.
sequent Thou know’st
what to this was sequent Thou know’st already.
are not near my conscience; their defeat Does by their own insinuation grow: ’Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes Between the pass and fell incensed points Of mighty opposites.
incensed points
the baser nature
their own insinuation
not perfect conscience
canker of our nature come In further evil?
such cozenage
known to him from England What is the issue of the business there.
a man’s life
, good Horatio
Horatio, That to Laertes I forgot myself;
portraiture of his: I’ll court his favours: But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me Into a towering passion.
lord of beasts, and his crib shall stand at the king’s mess: ’tis a chough; but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.
the king’s mess
impart a thing to you from his majesty.
receive it, sir, with all diligence of spirit.
tis for the head.
is very sultry and hot for my complexion.
twere—I cannot tell how.
a great wager
laid a great wager on your head: sir, this is the matter—
gentleman, full of most excellent differences, of very soft society and great showing: indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the continent of what part a gentleman would see.
court Laertes
suffers no perdition in you; though, I know, to divide him inventorially would dizzy the arithmetic of memory, and yet but yaw
respect of his quick sail.
verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great article; and his infusion of such dearth and rareness, as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his mirror; and who else would trace him, his umbrage, nothing more.
such dearth
true diction
infallibly of him.
concernancy, sir?
do’t, sir, really.
all’s golden words
ignorant of what excellence Laertes is—
compare with him in excellence; but, to know a man well, were to know himself.
laid on him by them, in his meed he’s unfellowed.
most delicate carriages
six French rapiers
six Barbary horses
very liberal conceit
wagered with him six Barbary horses: against the which he has imponed, as I take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so: three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of very liberal conceit.
carriages, sir, are the hangers.
be more german to the matter, if we could carry cannon by our sides: I would it might be hangers till then.
three liberal-conceited carriages
horses against six French swords, their assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages; that’s the French bet against the Danish.
laid on twelve for nine; and it would come to immediate trial, if your lordship would vouchsafe the answer.
lord, the opposition of your person in trial.
nothing but my shame and the odd hits.
sir; after what flourish your nature will.
commend my duty to your lordship.
(Exit Osric
are no tongues else for’s turn.
comply with his dug, before he sucked it.
outward habit
kind of yesty collection, which carries them through and through the most fond and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to their trial, the bubbles are out.
the most fond and winnowed opinions
yesty collection
the drossy age
the same bevy
young Osric
Osric, who brings back to him that you attend him in the hall: he sends to know if your pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will take longer time.
is ready; now or whensoever, provided I be so able as now.
the king’s pleasure
use some gentle entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play.
went into France, I have been in continual practice: I shall win at the odds.
continual practice
here about my heart: but it is no matter.
kind of gain-giving, as would perhaps trouble a woman.
obey it: I will forestall their repair hither, and say you are not fit.
providence in the fall of a sparrow.
aught of what he leaves, what is’t to leave betimes?
needs have heard, how I am punish’d With sore distraction.
sore distraction
Was’t Hamlet wrong’d Laertes
wrong Laertes
Hamlet from himself be ta’en away, And when he’s not himself does wrong Laertes, Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it.
madness: if’t be so, Hamlet is of the faction that is wrong’d;
poor Hamlet’s enemy
Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil Free me so far in your most generous thoughts, That I have shot mine arrow o’er the house, And hurt my brother.
terms of honour I stand aloof; and will no reconcilement, Till by some elder masters, of known honour, I have a voice and precedent of peace, To keep my name ungored.
will no reconcilement
some elder masters
known honour
receive your offer’d love like love, And will not wrong it.
your offer’d love
this brother’s wager
be your foil, Laertes: in mine ignorance Your skill shall, like a star i’ the darkest night, Stick fiery off indeed.
mine ignorance
foils, young Osric.
you both: But since he is better’d, we have therefore odds.
Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.
battlements their ordnance fire; The king shall drink to Hamlet’s better breath; And in the cup an union shall he throw, Richer than that which four successive kings In Denmark’s crown have worn.
the first or second hit
which four successive kings
their ordnance fire
Hamlet’s better breath
Denmark’s crown
all the battlements
let the kettle to the trumpet speak, The trumpet to the cannoneer without, The cannons to the heavens, the heavens to earth, “Now the king drinks to Hamlet.”
a wary eye
hit, a very palpable hit.
a very palpable hit
’s to thy health.
set it by awhile.
touch, a touch, I do confess.
scant of breath.
carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.
the poison’d cup
drink yet, madam; by and by.
tis almost ’gainst my conscience.
And yet ’tis
wanton of me.
Hamlet wounds Laertes
(Laertes wounds Hamlet
change rapiers, and Hamlet wounds Laertes.)
bleed on both sides.
How is’t, Laertes
mine own springe
mine own treachery
woodcock to mine own springe, Osric; I am justly kill’d with mine own treachery.
drink—O my dear Hamlet— The drink, the drink!
O my dear Hamlet
O villany
lock’d: Treachery!
art slain
hour of life; The treacherous instrument is in thy hand, Unbated and envenom’d: the foul practice Hath turn’d itself on me; lo, here I lie, Never to rise again: thy mother’s poison’d: I can no more: the king, the king’s to blame.
thy mother’s poison’d
The treacherous instrument
venom, to thy work.
Then, venom
incestuous, murderous, damned Dane
Drink off this potion.
is a poison temper’d by himself.
a poison temper’d
Exchange forgiveness
noble Hamlet
forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet:
come not upon thee, Nor thine on me!
Wretched queen
queen, adieu!
Is strict in his arrest—O, I could tell you— But let it be.
sergeant, death
report me and my cause aright To the unsatisfied.
Roman than a Dane: Here’s yet some liquor left.
O good Horatio
Horatio, what a wounded name, Things standing thus unknown, shall live behind me!
draw thy breath in pain, To tell my story.
this harsh world
What warlike noise
This warlike volley
come from Poland, To the ambassadors of England gives This warlike volley.
The potent poison
live to hear the news from England; But I do prophesy the election lights On Fortinbras: he has my dying voice; So tell him, with the occurrents, more and less, Which have solicited.
aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.
cries on havoc.
thine eternal cell
toward in thine eternal cell, That thou so many princes at a shot So bloodily hast struck?
affairs from England come too late: The ears are senseless that should give us hearing, To tell him his commandment is fulfill’d, That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead: Where should we have our thanks?
Had it the ability of life to thank you: He never gave commandment for their death.
carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts
casual slaughters
the inventors’ heads
the Polack wars
accidental judgments
the yet unknowing world
speak to the yet unknowing world How these things came about: so shall you hear Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts, Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters, Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause, And, in this upshot, purposes mistook Fall’n on the inventors’ heads: all this can I Truly deliver.
cunning and forced cause
embrace my fortune: I have some rights of memory in this kingdom, Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.
more mischance
are wild; lest more mischance, On plots and errors, happen.
men’s minds
few, that made him worth while.
an ineffectual, inarticulate man
feeling that the world was his, went to Bar Harbor and met Beatrice O’Hara.
two elder brothers
son Amory.
these two abstractions
lifeless, silky hair
an unassertive figure
his family’s life
hovered in the background of his family’s life, an unassertive figure with a face half-obliterated by lifeless, silky hair, continually occupied in “taking care” of his wife, continually harassed by the idea that he didn’t and couldn’t understand her.
But Beatrice Blaine
the consummate art
the Sacred Heart Convent
the exquisite delicacy
an educational extravagance
pictures taken on her father’s estate at Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, or in Rome at the Sacred Heart Convent—an educational extravagance that in her youth was only for the daughters of the exceptionally wealthy—showed the exquisite delicacy of her features, the consummate art and simplicity of her clothes.
her father’s estate
girl to Cardinal Vitori and Queen Margherita and more subtle celebrities that one must have had some culture even to have heard of.
a fabulously wealthy American girl
all Beatrice O’Hara
the great gardener
the inferior roses
culture rich in all arts and traditions, barren of all ideas, in the last of those days when the great gardener clipped the inferior roses to produce one perfect bud.
one perfect bud
married him—this almost entirely because she was a little bit weary, a little bit sad.
a tiresome season
brought into the world on a spring day in ninety-six.
was already a delightful companion for her.
a delightful companion
a facile imaginative mind
an auburn-haired boy
great, handsome eyes
his tenth year
a mild, almost epidemic consumption
her father’s private car
breakdown in a fashionable hotel, down to Mexico City, where she took a mild, almost epidemic consumption.
a fashionable hotel
part of her atmosphere—especially after several astounding bracers.
several astounding bracers
an intrinsic part
acquiescent bellboys
a natural repugnance
more or less fortunate little rich boys
governesses on the beach at Newport, or being spanked or tutored or read to from Do and Dare, or Frank on the Mississippi, Amory was biting acquiescent bellboys in the Waldorf, outgrowing a natural repugnance to chamber music and symphonies, and deriving a highly specialized education from his mother.
“Yes, Beatrice
name for his mother; she encouraged it.)
rising in early life makes one nervous.
facile as Bernhardt’s.
a rare cameo
this terrifying place
tangled hair
had no illusions about her.
talk glibly, if rather reminiscently, of Brahms and Mozart and Beethoven.
the Fêtes Galantes
sampled his mother’s apricot cordial, and as the taste pleased him, he became quite tipsy.
a vulgar, plebeian reaction
essayed a cigarette in his exaltation, and succumbed to a vulgar, plebeian reaction.
part of what in a later generation would have been termed her “line.”
son of mine,” he heard her tell a room full of awestruck, admiring women one day, “is entirely sophisticated and quite charming—but delicate—we’re all delicate; here, you know.”
sinking her voice to a whisper, she told them of the apricot cordial.
her beautiful bosom
rejoiced, for she was a brave raconteuse, but many were the keys turned in sideboard locks that night against the possible defection of little Bobby or Barbara.
the possible defection
a brave raconteuse
sideboard locks
These domestic pilgrimages
car, or Mr. Blaine when available, and very often a physician.
two maids
scarlet fever
totalled fourteen.
the whooping-cough four disgusted specialists
serve in place of friends, and an enviable standing from Pasadena to Cape Cod.
an enviable standing
grew more and more prone to like only new acquaintances, as there were certain stories, such as the history of her constitution and its many amendments, memories of her years abroad, that it was necessary for her to repeat at regular intervals.
only new acquaintances
Freudian dreams
lay siege to her nerves.
critical about American women, especially the floating population of ex-Westerners.
attached to any locality, just an accent”—she became dreamy.
just an accent”—she
old, moth-eaten London accents
down on their luck and have to be used by someone.
after several years in a Chicago grand-opera company.”
time in every Western woman’s life—she feels her husband is prosperous enough for her to have—accent—they try to impress me, my dear—” Though she thought of her body as a mass of frailties, she considered her soul quite as ill, and therefore important in her life.
every Western woman’s life
an enchantingly wavering attitude
process of losing or regaining faith in Mother Church, she maintained an enchantingly wavering attitude.
lived in the shadow of the great Continental cathedrals her soul would still be a thin flame on the mighty altar of Rome.
the American Catholic clergy
the bourgeois quality
the mighty altar
the clergyman—“but my mood
imagine the stream of hysterical women fluttering at your doors, beseeching you to be simpatico”—then after an interlude filled by the clergyman—“but my mood—is—oddly dissimilar.”
hysterical women
her clerical romance
divulge her clerical romance.
a decided penchant
whose passionate kisses
Swinburnian young man
unsentimental conversations
an intellectual romancing
discussed the matter pro and con with an intellectual romancing quite devoid of sappiness.
gone through a spiritual crisis, joined the Catholic Church, and was now—Monsignor Darcy.
the young pagan
company—quite the cardinal’s right-hand man.”
delightful company
quite the cardinal’s right-hand man
go to him one day, I know,” breathed the beautiful lady, “and Monsignor Darcy will understand him as he understood me.”
more than ever on to his Celtic mother.
idea being that he was to “keep up,” at each place “taking up the work where he left off,” yet as no tutor ever found the place he left off, his mind was still in very good shape.
made of him is problematical.
passengers the great ship slowly wheeled around and returned to New York to deposit Amory at the pier.
frantic telegrams
resemblance to delirium tremens, and Amory was left in Minneapolis, destined to spend the ensuing two years with his aunt and uncle.
the ensuing two years
a suspicious resemblance
delirium tremens
the crude, vulgar air
curled when he read it.
five o’clock
said, “on Thursday, December the seventeenth, at five o’clock, and I would like it very much if you could come.
Yours truly, Myra St. Claire
guys at school” how particularly superior he felt himself to be, yet this conviction was built upon shifting sands.
confusion of Mr. Reardon, whose accent Amory damned contemptuously, and to the delight of the class.
the utter confusion
took his revenge on the verbs, whenever he had his book open.
quite disastrous results
the middul clawses
the Umuricun revolution
came of very good blood—aw, quite good—I b’lieve.”
blundering on purpose.
pronounced by his mother completely enchanting.
furious, persistent efforts
the Lorelie rink
excel in the winter sports, and with his ankles aching and bending in spite of his efforts, he skated valiantly around the Lorelie rink every afternoon, wondering how soon he would be able to carry a hockey-stick without getting it inexplicably tangled in his skates.
His chief disadvantage
a dusty piece
affair with a dusty piece of peanut brittle.
Miss Myra St. Claire’s bobbing party
Daniel’s First-Year Latin
back of Collar and Daniel’s First-Year Latin, composed an answer: My dear Miss St. Claire: Your truly charming envitation for the evening of next Thursday evening was truly delightful to receive this morning.
Your truly charming envitation
My dear Miss St. Claire
present my compliments on next Thursday evening.
Faithfully, Amory Blaine
the slippery, shovel-scraped sidewalks
Myra’s house
walked pensively along the slippery, shovel-scraped sidewalks, and came in sight of Myra’s house, on the half-hour after five, a lateness which he fancied his mother would have favored.
waited on the doorstep with his eyes nonchalantly half-closed, and planned his entrance with precision.
exactly the correct modulation
your enchanting daughter
cross the floor, not too hastily, to Mrs. St. Claire, and say with exactly the correct modulation: “My dear Mrs. St. Claire, I’m frightfully sorry to be late, but my maid”—he paused there and realized he would be quoting—“but my uncle and I had to see a fella—Yes, I’ve met your enchanting daughter at dancing-school.”
My dear Mrs. St. Claire
all the starchy little females
rigid groups
divested himself of cap and coat.
the shrill squawk
squawk of conversation from the next room, and he decided it must be quite formal.
grinned horribly.
failure to be cockney was ruining his standing.
continued the butler, his voice rising unnecessarily, “she’s the only one what is here.
gasped in sudden horror.
been waitin’ for Amory Blaine.
go after ’em in the Packard.”
Amory’s despair
state of his vitality.
know about the auto accident,” he romanced.
Myra’s eyes
“Your uncle?”—alarm
a sorta gray horse
horse—a sorta gray horse.”
the Erse butler
put him on the rack without a scruple.
ordered for five and everybody was here, so we couldn’t wait—” “Well, I couldn’t help it, could I?”
wait till ha’past five.
the Minnehaha Club
gets to the Minnehaha Club, Amory.”
Amory’s shredded poise
sixty reproachful eyes
snowy streets
the horrible public descent
limousine, the horrible public descent of him and Myra before sixty reproachful eyes, his apology—a real one this time.
catch up with ’em before they get there?”
blasé seclusion
found in blasé seclusion before the fire and quite regain his lost attitude.
a faint hope
stepped into the machine he hurriedly slapped the paint of diplomacy over a rather boxlike plan he had conceived.
a rather boxlike plan
based upon some “trade-lasts” gleaned at dancing-school, to the effect that he was “awful good-looking and English, sort of.”
a thousand pardons
said, lowering his voice and choosing his words carefully, “I beg a thousand pardons.
quintessence of romance.
her thirteen-year-old, arrow-collar taste
faux pas
care, I s’pose.”
t’bacca heart
pictured an all-night tobacco debauch, with Amory pale and reeling from the effect of nicotined lungs.
an all-night tobacco debauch
nicotined lungs
a little gasp
Oh, Amory
the burlesque show
hesitated, giving her imagination time to picture dark horrors—“I went to the burlesque show last week.”
my fambly knew”—he
rush of sentiment.
Thick dusk
turn she was jolted against him; their hands touched.
stirred within Amory.
crush on Froggy Parker.
silence, while Amory thrilled.
something fascinating about Myra, shut away here cosily from the dim, chill air.
the dim, chill air
curling out from under her skating cap.
young laughter
the frosted glass
peering through the frosted glass along the lamp-lit street, he made out the dark outline of the bobbing party.
Myra’s hand
a violent, jerky effort
go to the Minnehaha straight,” he whispered.
vision of her mother, and then—alas for convention—glanced into the eyes beside.
street, Richard, and drive straight to the Minnehaha Club!”
sigh of relief.
half misty
vibrant with rich tension.
heaps of snow lining the sides like the tracks of giant moles.
huge heaps
dark creases
giant moles
lingered for a moment on the steps, and watched the white holiday moon.
moons like that one”—Amory made a vague gesture—“make people mystérieuse.
look like a young witch with her cap off and her hair sorta mussed”—her hands clutched at her hair—“Oh, leave it, it looks good.”
mussed”—her hands
a cosy fire
drifted up the stairs and Myra led the way into the little den of his dreams, where a cosy fire was burning before a big sink-down couch.
a big sink-down couch
Amory, a cradle for many an emotional crisis.
an’ pushin
whisperin’ an’ pushin’ each other off.
shy fellas
an’ whisperin
some crazy cross-eyed girl”—he
gave a terrifying imitation—“she’s always talkin’ hard, sorta, to the chaperon.”
skiing with Marylyn and I tomorrow?”
girls in the daytime,” he said shortly, and then, thinking this a bit abrupt, he added: “But I like you.”
couch with this wonderful-looking boy—the little fire—the sense that they were alone in the great building— Myra capitulated.
fallen twenty-five places in one hour.
Myra’s cheek
leaned over quickly and kissed Myra’s cheek.
tasted his lips curiously, as if he had munched some new fruit.
brushed like young wild flowers in the wind.
drooped against his shoulder.
Amory, disgust, loathing for the whole incident.
Sudden revulsion
their clinging hands
creep out of his body and hide somewhere safe out of sight, up in the corner of his mind.
pink with bruised vanity, the great bow on the back of her head trembling sympathetically.
bruised vanity
were a new animal of whose presence on the earth he had not heretofore been aware.
Myra’s mother
fumbling with her lorgnette.
man at the desk told me you two children were up here—How do you do, Amory.”
Myra’s voice
subsided, and Myra’s voice was placid as a summer lake when she answered her mother.
the vapid odor
odor of hot chocolate and teacakes as he silently followed mother and daughter downstairs.
mingled with the voices of many girls humming the air, and a faint glow was born and spread over him: “Casey-Jones—mounted to the cab-un Casey-Jones—’th his orders in his hand.
the cab-un Casey-Jones—’th
a faint glow
his farewell journey
mounted to the cab-un Took his farewell journey to the promised land.”
spent nearly two years in Minneapolis.
moccasins that were born yellow, but after many applications of oil and dirt assumed their mature color, a dirty, greenish brown; he wore a gray plaid mackinaw coat, and a red toboggan cap.
a gray plaid mackinaw coat
a red toboggan cap
a dirty, greenish brown
pulled down over his face.
the darn thing
trouble with this one was that you breathed into it and your breath froze; one day the darn thing froze his cheek.
rubbed snow on his cheek, but it turned bluish-black just the same.
his eccentric course
Amory’s life
bumping into fences, rolling in gutters, and pursuing his eccentric course out of Amory’s life.
occurred in Act III of Arsène Lupin.
sat in the first row at the Wednesday and Saturday matinees.
the Wednesday and Saturday matinees
be a great artist or a great soldier, the next best thing is to be a great criminal.”
stands above Sallee in that sweet, deep love.”
a better pitcher
the coin-pass, chameleon ties
McGovern of Minnesota would make the first or second All-American, how to do the card-pass, how to do the coin-pass, chameleon ties, how babies were born, and whether Three-fingered Brown was really a better pitcher than Christie Mathewson.
Law, Sapho, Dangerous Dan McGrew, The Broad Highway (three times), The Fall of the House of Usher, Three Weeks, Mary Ware, the Little Colonel’s Chum, Gunga Din, The Police Gazette, and Jim-Jam Jems.
Jim-Jam Jems
the Little Colonel’s Chum
biases in history, and was particularly fond of the cheerful murder stories of Mary Roberts Rinehart.
all the Henty biases
the cheerful murder stories
distaste for standard authors.
owing to his nervous habit of chewing them out of shape.
his nervous habit
suspicions of the next borrower.
the jealous suspicions
the next borrower
stroll home in the balmy air of August night, dreaming along Hennepin and Nicollet Avenues, through the gay crowd.
the balmy air
the air cushions
ambiguous eyes
asphalts of fourteen.
a great halfback
one about the Japanese invasion, when he was rewarded by being made the youngest general in the world.
becoming he dreamed of, never the being.
characteristic of Amory.
his first long trousers
collar with the edges unassailably meeting, purple socks, and handkerchief with a purple border peeping from his breast pocket.
purple socks
unassailably meeting
a purple accordion tie
a “Belmont” collar
code to live by, which, as near as it can be named, was a sort of aristocratic egotism.
aristocratic egotism
a certain variant
order that his past might always be identified with him, was Amory Blaine.
capable of infinite expansion for good or evil.
a fortunate youth
a lotta deep books
his superior mentality
relied on his facility (learn things sorta quick) and his superior mentality (read a lotta deep books).
a mechanical or scientific genius
fact that he could never become a mechanical or scientific genius.
athlete of possibilities and a supple dancer.
a supple dancer
power of dominating all contemporary males, the gift of fascinating all women.
Mentally.—Complete, unquestioned superiority.
unquestioned superiority
rather a Puritan conscience
made him consider himself a great deal worse than other boys.
desire to influence people in almost every way, even for evil.
coldness and lack of affection, amounting sometimes to cruelty.
a certain coldness
an unholy selfishness
a puzzled, furtive interest
interest in everything concerning sex.
strain of weakness running crosswise through his makeup.
surly sensitiveness
a harsh phrase
timid stupidity
lips of an older boy (older boys usually detested him) was liable to sweep him off his poise into surly sensitiveness, or timid stupidity.
capable of recklessness and audacity, he possessed neither courage, perseverance, nor self-respect.
a vague top
tempered with self-suspicion if not self-knowledge, a sense of people as automatons to his will, a desire to “pass” as many boys as possible and get to a vague top of the world.
drift into adolescence.
midsummer languor
mother waiting in her electric on the gravelled station drive.
the gravelled station drive
electric, one of the early types, and painted gray.
a dreamy recollected smile
the requisite charm
boy—you’re so tall.
a traffic policeman
slipped cautiously into a speed of two miles an hour, beseeching Amory to act as sentinel; and at one busy crossing she made him get out and run ahead to signal her forward like a traffic policeman.
the awkward age
boy, what odd clothes!
what odd clothes
look as if they were a set—don’t they?
tell you about your heart—you’ve probably been neglecting your heart—and you don’t know.”
overlay of his own generation.
the recent overlay
a minute shyness
the old cynical kinship
Aside from a minute shyness, he felt that the old cynical kinship with his mother had not been one bit broken.
state of superloneliness, finding a lethargic content in smoking “Bull” at the garage with one of the chauffeurs.
a lethargic content
foliage-hung hiding-places
a great and constantly increasing family
the many flowerbeds
the darkening trees
cats that prowled the many flowerbeds and were silhouetted suddenly at night against the darkening trees.
old and new summer houses
The sixty acres
the shadowy paths
paths that Beatrice at last captured Amory, after Mr. Blaine had, as usual, retired for the evening to his private library.
a long tête-à-tête
reproving him for avoiding her, she took him for a long tête-à-tête in the moonlight.
a fortunate woman
grace of a fortunate woman of thirty.
the exquisite neck
spoke of it as a sturdy, gallant feat.
a sturdy, gallant feat
me”—her voice
done the consistent drinking that I have, he would have been physically shattered, my dear, and in his grave—long in his grave.”
sounded to Froggy Parker.
soared through the air, parti-colored birds with iridescent plumage.
iridescent plumage
, parti-colored birds
barbaric trumpets
flare of barbaric trumpets—what?”
paler than winter moons, more golden than harvest moons—” “Are you quite well now, Beatrice?”
quite dull, moons
express it to you, Amory, but—I am not understood.”
put his arm around his mother, rubbing his head gently against her shoulder.
poor Beatrice
Beatrice—poor Beatrice.”
“Poor Beatrice
Tell me about you, Amory.
“No, Beatrice
adapted myself to the bourgeoisie.
surprised himself by saying that, and he pictured how Froggy would have gaped.
Everybody in Minneapolis is going to go away to school.”
away to school at fifteen, and I want to, Beatrice.”
delighted him by saying: “Amory, I have decided to let you have your way.
Beatrice’s suggestion
To St. Regis’s in Connecticut.”
fret away my years in this country.
typical of very vulgar people, and I feel sure we are the great coming nation—yet”—and she sighed—“I feel my life should have drowsed away close to an older, mellower civilization, a land of greens and autumnal browns—” Amory did not answer, so his mother continued: “My regret is that you haven’t been abroad, but still, as you are a man, it’s better that you should grow up here under the snarling eagle—is that the right term?”
the snarling eagle
an older, mellower civilization
autumnal browns
very vulgar people
have a free week, so I want you to go up the Hudson and pay a visit.”
To who?” “To Monsignor Darcy, Amory.
went to Harrow and then to Yale—became a Catholic.
talk to you—I feel he can be such a help—” She stroked his auburn hair gently.
one overcoat
” “Dear Beatrice
dear Amory
one sweater
“Dear Amory
jersey, one overcoat, winter, etc.,” set out for New England, the land of schools.
the Knickerbocker families
their mental stimulus
its great rinks
a Thorough Mental, Moral, and Physical Training
set forth in a hundred circulars as “To impart a Thorough Mental, Moral, and Physical Training as a Christian Gentleman, to fit the boy for meeting the problems of his day and generation, and to give a solid foundation in the Arts and Sciences.”
their well-set-up, conventional, impressive type
their vague purpose
a scoffing confidence
his tutelary visit
doubling back to New York to pay his tutelary visit.
a Hudson River steamboat
sense of cleanliness he drew from the tall white buildings seen from a Hudson River steamboat in the early morning.
crowded with dreams of athletic prowess at school that he considered this visit only as a rather tiresome prelude to the great adventure.
athletic prowess
a rather tiresome prelude
hill overlooking the river, and there lived its owner, between his trips to all parts of the Roman-Catholic world, rather like an exiled Stuart king waiting to be called to the rule of his land.
an exiled Stuart king
Monsignor Darcy’s house
an ancient, rambling structure
stout for symmetry, with hair the color of spun gold, and a brilliant, enveloping personality.
resembled a Turner sunset, and attracted both admiration and attention.
his full purple regalia
all his clever jibes
even cleverer innuendoes
innuendoes against Episcopalians.
idea of God enough to be a celibate, and rather liked his neighbor.
was still a youth, and couldn’t be shocked.
mystery about pulling rusty wires, and appreciating life to the fullest, if not entirely enjoying it.
rusty wires
a very moral, very religious (if not particularly pious) clergyman
a half-hour’s conversation
the jovial, impressive prelate
sight—the jovial, impressive prelate who could dazzle an embassy ball, and the green-eyed, intent youth, in his first long trousers, accepted in their own minds a relation of father and son within a half-hour’s conversation.
come from school—St. Regis’s, you know.”
says—a remarkable woman; have a cigarette—I’m sure you smoke.
loathe all science and mathematics—” Amory nodded vehemently.
’em all.
hate school for a while, too, but I’m glad you’re going to St. Regis’s.”
a gentleman’s school
go to Princeton,” said Amory.
men as sissies, like I used to be, and all Yale men as wearing big blue sweaters and smoking pipes.”
big blue sweaters
think of Princeton as being lazy and good-looking and aristocratic—you know, like a spring day.
” finished Monsignor
was for Bonnie Prince Charlie,” announced Amory.
the Southern Confederacy
an Irish patriot
be one of his principal biases.
a crowded hour
hour which included several more cigarettes, and during which Monsignor learned, to his surprise but not to his horror, that Amory had not been brought up a Catholic, he announced that he had another guest.
the Honorable Thornton Hancock
last of a distinguished, patriotic, and brilliant family.
a distinguished, patriotic, and brilliant family
an erudite history
said Monsignor confidentially, treating Amory as a contemporary.
his staid old mind
is really at sea and longs for a sturdy spar like the Church to cling to.”
a sturdy spar
Their first luncheon
Amory’s early life
the memorable events
one of the memorable events of Amory’s early life.
a peculiar brightness
a thousand impulses
thought by question and suggestion, and Amory talked with an ingenious brilliance of a thousand impulses and desires and repulsions and faiths and fears.
an ingenious brilliance
certainly not colder mentality
the mellow sunshine
effect of sunlight to many people; Amory gave it in his youth and, to some extent, when he was very much older, but never again was it quite so mutually spontaneous.
a radiant boy
splendor of two continents and talked with Parnell and Gladstone and Bismarck—and afterward he added to Monsignor: “But his education ought not to be entrusted to a school or college.”
Amory’s intellect
matters of popularity, the intricacies of a university social system and American Society as represented by Biltmore Teas and Hot Springs golf-links.
Biltmore Teas and Hot Springs golf-links
joy of life crystallized to a thousand ambitions.
Amory’s mind
a thousand ambitions
The Beloved Vagabond
idea as to what Bernard Shaw was—but Monsignor made quite as much out of The Beloved Vagabond and Sir Nigel, taking good care that Amory never once felt out of his depth.
only the vaguest idea
Amory’s preliminary skirmish
skirmish with his own generation.
’re not sorry to go, of course.
people like us our home is where we are not,” said Monsignor.
“Well—” “Goodbye
 Amory’s two years
had as little real significance in his own life as the American “prep” school, crushed as it is under the heel of the universities, has to American life in general.
clean, flaccid and innocuous preparatory schools
a governing class
consciousness of a governing class; we have, instead, clean, flaccid and innocuous preparatory schools.
went all wrong at the start, was generally considered both conceited and arrogant, and universally detested.
a reckless brilliancy
boy very much bigger, from which he emerged badly beaten, but rather proud of himself.
a lazy indifference
combined with a lazy indifference toward his work, exasperated every master in school.
sulking in corners and reading after lights.
do that posing absolutely essential to him.
was the last part to go below the surface, so he could still enjoy a comfortable glow when “Wookey-wookey,” the deaf old housekeeper, told him that he was the best-looking boy she had ever seen.
the deaf old housekeeper
the lightest and youngest man
was Amory’s first term.
Amory’s first term
returned to Minneapolis, tightlipped and strangely jubilant.
was sort of fresh at first,” he told Frog Parker patronizingly, “but I got along fine—lightest man on the squad.
away to school, Froggy.
hall that Amory was to come to his room at nine.
disposed toward him.
this Mr. Margotson
delicate ground
will when he knows he’s on delicate ground.
have in you the makings of a—a very good man.”
talk as if he were an admitted failure.
cope with them—to conform to what others expect of him.”
hemmed again with delicate reticence, and continued: “They seem to think that you’re—ah—rather too fresh—” Amory could stand no more.
delicate reticence
refusal to be helped.
couched up in his room, he munched Nabiscos and finished The White Company.
a long-anticipated event
Washington’s Birthday
burst upon him on Washington’s Birthday with the brilliance of a long-anticipated event.
a vivid whiteness
young Paskert
picture of splendor that rivalled the dream cities in the Arabian Nights; but this time he saw it by electric light, and romance gleamed from the chariot-race sign on Broadway and from the women’s eyes at the Astor, where he and young Paskert from St. Regis’ had dinner.
the chariot-race sign
the women’s eyes
the Arabian Nights
the nervous twanging
untuned violins
epicurean delight
twanging and discord of untuned violins and the sensuous, heavy fragrance of paint and powder, he moved in a sphere of epicurean delight.
the sensuous, heavy fragrance
The Little Millionaire
Millionaire, with George M. Cohan, and there was one stunning young brunette who made him sit with brimming eyes in the ecstasy of watching her dance.
you—wonderful girl, What a wonderful girl you are—” sang the tenor, and Amory agreed silently, but passionately.
a crumpled butterfly
butterfly on the stage, a great burst of clapping filled the house.
love like that, to the languorous magic melody of such a tune!
the languorous magic melody
facile froth-like comedy
laid on a roof-garden, and the cellos sighed to the musical moon, while light adventure and facile froth-like comedy flitted back and forth in the calcium.
an unintelligible waiter
sparkling wine
poured by an unintelligible waiter.
golden moonlight
such a long sigh
front of him twisted around and stared and said loud enough for him to hear: “What a remarkable-looking boy!”
handsome to the population of New York.
strain on Amory’s musings: “I’d marry that girl tonight.”
His uncertain fifteen-year-old voice
Amory’s musings
a melancholy strain
need to ask what girl he referred to.
introduce her to my people,” continued Paskert.
said it instead of Paskert.
a darn sight
youth with emphasis, “and I know that girl’s as good as gold.
the worldly youth
mixing in the Broadway crowd, dreaming on the music that eddied out of the cafés.
a weary excitement
flashed on and off like myriad lights, pale or rouged faces, tired, yet sustained by a weary excitement.
myriad lights
watched them in fascination.
the dull hours
known at every restaurant and café, wearing a dress-suit from early evening to early morning, sleeping away the dull hours of the forenoon.
October of his second and last year at St. Regis’ was a high point in Amory’s memory.
Amory’s memory
his second and last year
heroism of plunging, crashing bodies and aching limbs.
the straining, glorious heroism
wild despair
a hoarse, furious whisper
the bloodstained bandage
a snappy, exhilarating afternoon
aching limbs
the crisp autumnal twilight
one with Roland and Horatius, Sir Nigel and Ted Coy, scraped and stripped into trim and then flung by his own will into the breach, beating back the tide, hearing from afar the thunder of cheers.
a Norse galley
the November dusk
bruised and weary, but still elusive, circling an end, twisting, changing pace, straight-arming.
touchdown of the game.
the only touchdown
the Groton goal
the scoffing superiority
superiority of sixth-form year and success Amory looked back with cynical wonder on his status of the year before.
cynical wonder
completely as Amory Blaine could ever be changed.
years in Minneapolis—these had been his ingredients when he entered St. Regis’.
lay down new and more conventional planking on the fundamental Amory.
the fundamental Amory
the “Amory plus Beatrice
new and more conventional planking
the ferreting eyes
a boarding-school
a thick enough overlay
this fundamental Amory
fact that this fundamental Amory had not in himself changed.
both St. Regis
contemptible weaknesses
a star quarterback
impressionable small boys
the St. Regis Tattler
a clever actor
the very vanities
tendency to pose, his laziness, and his love of playing the fool, were now taken as a matter of course, recognized eccentricities in a star quarterback, a clever actor, and the editor of the St. Regis Tattler: it puzzled him to see impressionable small boys imitating the very vanities that had not long ago been contemptible weaknesses.
slumped into dreamy content.
dreamy content
pleasure of hearing the violin music cross the grass and come surging in at his window.
exotic with intrigue and moonlight and adventure.
Hungarian waltzes
secret cafés
lyrical outpourings
the archaic swing
moved his bed so that the sun would wake him at dawn that he might dress and go out to the archaic swing that hung from an apple-tree near the sixth-form house.
effect of swinging into the wide air, into a fairyland of piping satyrs and nymphs with the faces of fair-haired girls he passed in the streets of Eastchester.
piping satyrs
fair-haired girls
dwindled out of sight in a golden dot.
his eighteenth year
beginning of his eighteenth year: The Gentleman from Indiana, The New Arabian Nights, The Morals of Marcus Ordeyne, The Man Who Was Thursday, which he liked without understanding; Stover at Yale, that became somewhat of a textbook; Dombey and Son, because he thought he really should read better stuff; Robert Chambers, David Graham Phillips, and E. Phillips Oppenheim complete, and a scattering of Tennyson and Kipling.
The New Arabian Nights
stirred his languid interest.
his languid interest
rigid clarity
found a co-philosopher in Rahill, the president of the sixth form.
lying belly-down along the edge of the baseball diamond, or late at night with their cigarettes glowing in the dark, they threshed out the questions of school, and there was developed the term “slicker.”
whispered Rahill one night, putting his head inside the door five minutes after lights.
lie in the window-seat, why don’t you.”
lit a cigarette while Rahill settled for a conversation.
Rahill’s favorite subject
tired of outlining them for his benefit.
“Ted Converse
the freshman year
flunk out in the middle of the freshman year.
raise hell for a year or so; finally his father will make him go into the paint business.
name on it—” “Hold up, Amory.
the Presbyterian Church
locomotor ataxia
a baptizing stand
a darn good head
got a darn good head on you.”
the concrete minutiae
stubbed his toe upon the concrete minutiae of it.
keep my temper when they get selfish and then they think they pay me back by voting for me and telling me I’m the ‘big man’ of St. Regis’s.
is when a fellow slicks his hair back with water.”
means on the broad path of honesty to get ahead, be popular, admired, and never in trouble.
soaked in water or tonic, parted in the middle, and slicked back as the current of fashion dictated.
adopted tortoiseshell spectacles as badges of their slickerhood, and this made them so easy to recognize that Amory and Rahill never missed one.
tortoiseshell spectacles
wiser and shrewder than his contemporaries, managing some team or other, and keeping his cleverness carefully concealed.
year in college, when the outline became so blurred and indeterminate that it had to be subdivided many times, and became only a quality.
the slicker a most valuable classification
Amory’s secret ideal
the slicker proper
streak that was quite irreconcilable to the slicker proper.
all the slicker qualifications
hypocrisy of school tradition.
a definite element
the leaded windowpanes
noticed only the wealth of sunshine creeping across the long, green swards, dancing on the leaded windowpanes, and swimming around the tops of spires and towers and battlemented walls.
battlemented walls
the long, green swards
a new tendency
glare straight ahead when he passed anyone.
look at him critically.
something the matter with his clothes, and wished he had shaved that morning on the train.
felt unnecessarily stiff and awkward among these white-flannelled, bareheaded youths, who must be juniors and seniors, judging from the savoir faire with which they strolled.
these white-flannelled, bareheaded youths
a large, dilapidated mansion
12 University Place
a dozen freshmen
was a large, dilapidated mansion, at present apparently uninhabited, though he knew it housed usually a dozen freshmen.
a hurried skirmish
man in town who was wearing a hat.
a confectionary window
returned hurriedly to 12 University, left his derby, and, emerging bareheaded, loitered down Nassau Street, stopping to investigate a display of athletic photographs in a store window, including a large one of Allenby, the football captain, and next attracted by the sign “Jigger Shop” over a confectionary window.
12 University
“Jigger Shop
a high stool
took a seat on a high stool.
“Double chocolate jiggah
munched four of these, finding them of pleasing savor, and then consumed another double-chocolate jigger before ease descended upon him.
another double-chocolate jigger
a cursory inspection
leather pennants
inspection of the pillowcases, leather pennants, and Gibson Girls that lined the walls, he left, and continued along Nassau Street with his hands in his pockets.
appear until the following Monday.
the freshman cap
upper classmen
drift endlessly up and down the street, emitting great clouds of smoke from brand-new pipes.
the hatless, white-shod, book-laden throng
a new contingent
an upper classman
tried conscientiously to look both pleasantly blasé and casually critical, which was as near as he could analyze the prevalent facial expression.
the prevalent facial expression
need of hearing his own voice, so he retreated to his house to see if anyone else had arrived.
scrutinized his room resignedly, concluding that it was hopeless to attempt any more inspired decoration than class banners and tiger pictures.
the rickety stairs
any more inspired decoration
face with gray eyes and a humorous smile appeared in the doorway.
a humorous smile
Maybe Mrs. Twelve
inmate of this asylum?”
so few freshmen
thought of the campus,” he said, “but they say there’s so few freshmen that they’re lost.
“My name’s Holiday
“Blaine’s my name
the fashionable low swoop
shook hands with the fashionable low swoop.
Andover—where did you?”
“St. Regis
meet his brother for dinner at six.
anaemic vegetables
the Kenilworth Amory
the other freshmen
he of the gray eyes was Kerry—and during a limpid meal of thin soup and anaemic vegetables they stared at the other freshmen, who sat either in small groups looking very ill at ease, or in large groups seeming very much at home.
a limpid meal
got to swallow everything the first year.
’s like a damned prep school.”
Lot of pep, though,” he insisted.
the elder brother
Amory of the elder brother.
Prince—the Daily Princetonian, you know.”
the Daily Princetonian
freshman football
take a whack at freshman football.”
Play at St. Regis’s?”
Amory depreciatingly
the wild yelling
comments of a man in front of him, as well as by the wild yelling and shouting.
the glib comments
baby—you’re so big and strong, but oh, so gentle!”
“Oh, Clinch
whistling “By the Sea,” and the audience took it up noisily.
much stamping
song that included much stamping and then by an endless, incoherent dirge.
an endless, incoherent dirge
an indistinguishable song
works in a Jam Factoree And—that-may-be-all-right
a Jam Factoree
you can’t-fool-me For I know—damn—well That she don’t-make-jam-all-night!
curious impersonal glances
pushed out, giving and receiving curious impersonal glances, Amory decided that he liked the movies, wanted to enjoy them as the row of upper classmen in front had enjoyed them, with their arms along the backs of the seats, their comments Gaelic and caustic, their attitude a mixture of critical wit and tolerant amusement.
tolerant amusement
back to 12.
sit for a while on the front steps, so he bade them good night.
The great tapestries
tapestries of trees had darkened to ghosts back at the last edge of twilight.
rifts of moon, swept a song, a song with more than a hint of sadness, infinitely transient, infinitely regretful.
the gossamer rifts
the couched undergraduates
tenor songs
Booth Tarkington’s amusements
mingled emotions
told him of one of Booth Tarkington’s amusements: standing in mid-campus in the small hours and singing tenor songs to the stars, arousing mingled emotions in the couched undergraduates according to the sentiment of their moods.
broke the gloom, and marching figures, white-shirted, white-trousered, swung rhythmically up the street, with linked arms and heads thrown back: “Going back—going back, Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall, Going back—going back— To the—Best—Old—Place—of—All.
marching figures
the shadowy line
a white-clad phalanx
going back, From all—this—earthly—ball, We’ll—clear—the—track—as—we—go—back— Going—back—to—Nassau—Hall!”
the ghostly procession
closed his eyes as the ghostly procession drew near.
dropped out except the tenors, who bore the melody triumphantly past the danger-point and relinquished it to the fantastic chorus.
the rich illusion
illusion of harmony.
his hundred-and-sixty pounds
the heavy blue and crimson lines
head of the white platoon marched Allenby, the football captain, slim and defiant, as if aware that this year the hopes of the college rested on him, that his hundred-and-sixty pounds were expected to dodge to victory through the heavy blue and crimson lines.
the white platoon
indistinct above the polo shirts, the voices blent in a paean of triumph—and then the procession passed through shadowy Campbell Arch, and the voices grew fainter as it wound eastward over the campus.
shadowy Campbell Arch
lanes, where Witherspoon brooded like a dark mother over Whig and Clio, her Attic children, where the black Gothic snake of Little curled down to Cuyler and Patton, these in turn flinging the mystery out over the placid slope rolling to the lake.
the shadowy scented lanes
her Attic children
the placid slope
clear blue aspiration
aristocratic Elizabethan ladies
, Seventy-nine Hall, brick-red and arrogant, Upper and Lower Pyne
consciousness—West and Reunion, redolent of the sixties, Seventy-nine Hall, brick-red and arrogant, Upper and Lower Pyne, aristocratic Elizabethan ladies not quite content to live among shopkeepers, and, topping all, climbing with clear blue aspiration, the great dreaming spires of Holder and Cleveland towers.
the great dreaming spires
the handsome, prosperous big-game crowds
its half-grasped significance
beauty, its half-grasped significance, the wild moonlight revel of the rushes, the handsome, prosperous big-game crowds, and under it all the air of struggle that pervaded his class.
that breathless social system
sophomore year
admitted, of the bogey “Big Man.”
St. Paul’s secretary
the bogey “Big Man
the jerseyed freshmen
a Lawrenceville celebrity vice
the friendly, rather puzzled high-school element
Hill, Pomfret
certain tacitly reserved tables
tables in Commons, dressing in their own corners of the gymnasium, and drawing unconsciously about them a barrier of the slightly less important but socially ambitious to protect them from the friendly, rather puzzled high-school element.
realized this Amory resented social barriers as artificial distinctions made by the strong to bolster up their weak retainers and keep out the almost strong.
their weak retainers
freshman football practice
12 Univee
the “plebeian drunks
three or four inconspicuous and quite startled boys
a New York private school
really the dark-haired one
brother, Burne.
humorous gray eyes
rare, satirical humor
censor of conceit, vendor of rare, satirical humor.
table of their future friendship with all his ideas of what college should and did mean.
inclined as yet to take things seriously, chided him gently for being curious at this inopportune time about the intricacies of the social system, but liked him and was both interested and amused.
this inopportune time
gliding in quietly at night and off again in the early morning to get up his work in the library—he was out for the Princetonian, competing furiously against forty others for the coveted first place.
the coveted first place
a busy apparition
won the competition, but, returning to college in February, he dauntlessly went after the prize again.
Amory’s acquaintance
acquaintance with him was in the way of three-minute chats, walking to and from lectures, so he failed to penetrate Burne’s one absorbing interest and find what lay beneath it.
Burne’s one absorbing interest
was far from contented.
missed the place he had won at St. Regis’, the being known and admired, yet Princeton stimulated him, and there were many things ahead calculated to arouse the Machiavelli latent in him,
a reluctant graduate
flamboyant Colonial
brilliant adventurers
an honest elaboration
well-dressed philanderers
literary Quadrangle
elaboration of prep-school standards; Cap and Gown, anti-alcoholic, faintly religious and politically powerful; flamboyant Colonial; literary Quadrangle; and the dozen others, varying in age and position.
an impressive mélange
brought an under classman into too glaring a light was labelled with the damning brand of “running it out.”
too glaring a light
an under classman
the damning brand
until at club elections in sophomore year everyone should be sewed up in some bag for the rest of his college career.
the noncommittal man
caustic comments
the influential man
board of the Daily Princetonian would get anyone a good deal.
the Nassau Literary Magazine
His vague desire
the most ingenious brains
faded out when he found that the most ingenious brains and talents were concentrated upon the Triangle Club, a musical comedy organization that every year took a great Christmas trip.
the embryo successes
the lonely grind
security of the big school groups.
downcast eye
his hurried step
the damned middle class
contemplative precision
complained to Kerry one day as he lay stretched out on the sofa, consuming a family of Fatimas with contemplative precision.
have it on ’em, more self-confidence, dress better, cut a swathe—” “Oh, it isn’t that I mind the glittering caste system,” admitted Amory.
the glittering caste system
only a sweaty bourgeois
get anywhere by working for it.
“Honorable scars
craned his neck suddenly at the street.
want to see what he looks like—and Humbird just behind.”
the rugged type
looks like a knockout, but this Langueduc—he’s the rugged type, isn’t he?
subsided, “you’re a literary genius.
’s up to you.”
say it to anybody except you.”
poems like this guy D’Invilliers in the Lit.”
this guy D’Invilliers
pile of magazines on the table.
said in surprise, “he’s a freshman, isn’t he?”
tapers, prisoned in their silver frames, Wave their thin flames like shadows in the wind, Pia, Pompia, come—come away—’ “Now, what the devil does that mean?”
a pantry scene
her smooth bust
a stork’s
gosh, Kerry, what in hell is it all about?
got to think of hearses and stale milk when you read it.
stale milk
tossed the magazine on the table.
thumb my nose at the Golden Treasury and be a Princeton slicker.”
a Princeton slicker
a great dramatist
“Better drift
drift, like me.
sail into prominence on Burne’s coattails.”
Burne’s coattails
Princetonian chairman
pull strings, even for somebody else, or be Princetonian chairman or Triangle president.
mix around the class right now, when it’s fun to be a snob.
all the prize parlor-snakes
do it unless I could be damn debonaire about it—introduce her to all the prize parlor-snakes, and the football captain, and all that simple stuff.”
going around in a circle.
don’t, just take it easy.”
decided that next fall would inaugurate his career, and relinquished himself to watching Kerry extract joy from 12 Univee.
the local plumber
one man’s birthday
Amory’s room
the Jewish youth’s bed
a hilarious celebration
drunks—pictures, books, and furniture—in the bathroom, to the confusion of the pair, who hazily discovered the transposition on their return from a Trenton spree; they were disappointed beyond measure when the plebeian drunks decided to take it as a joke; they played red-dog and twenty-one and jackpot from dinner to dawn, and on the occasion of one man’s birthday persuaded him to buy sufficient champagne for a hilarious celebration.
the plebeian drunks
a Trenton spree
dropped him down two flights of stairs and called, shamefaced and penitent, at the infirmary all the following week.
Amory’s mail
demanded Kerry one day, protesting at the size of Amory’s mail.
looking at the postmarks lately—Farmington and Dobbs and Westover and Dana Hall—what’s the idea?”
car of her own and that’s damn convenient; there’s Sally Weatherby—she’s getting too fat; there’s Myra St. Claire, she’s an old flame, easy to kiss if you like it—” “What line do you throw ’em?” demanded Kerry.
the mad wags
is safe if she’s with me.
start to hold somebody’s hand, they laugh at me, and let me, just as if it wasn’t part of them.
somebody’s hand
hold of a hand they sort of disconnect it from the rest of them.”
come back in half an hour—startle ’em.”
a St. Timothy girl
a nail scissors
rest of the letter all over school.
good old Amory
picture himself as “good old Amory.”
life in 12 Univee continued interesting if not purposeful.
day Amory indulged in a club sandwich, cornflakes, and Julienne potatoes at Joe’s, accompanied usually by Kerry or Alec Connage.
Julienne potatoes
slicker from Hotchkiss, who lived next door and shared the same enforced singleness as Amory, due to the fact that his entire class had gone to Yale.
the same enforced singleness
a limitless charge account
account could be opened there, a convenience that Amory appreciated.
liberal, was not at all what he had expected.
experiment with his digestion.
day in March, finding that all the tables were occupied, he slipped into a chair opposite a freshman who bent intently over a book at the last table.
Mrs. Warren’s Profession
the other freshman
discovered Shaw quite by accident while browsing in the library during mid-years); the other freshman, also intent on his volume, meanwhile did away with a trio of chocolate malted milks.
bacon buns
chocolate malted milks
wandered curiously to his fellow-luncher’s book.
his fellow-luncher’s book
Amory’s eyes
Marpessa, by Stephen Phillips.
morsels of Shakespeare and Milton had been recently forced upon him.
his metrical education
exclaimed aloud as if involuntarily: “Ha! Great stuff!”
The other freshman
referring to your bacon buns?”
your bacon buns
keenness that he gave.
a voluminous keenness
the large spectacles
D’Invilliers,” who signed the passionate love-poems in the Lit.
that awful highbrow
Amory’s companion
the passionate love-poems
absorbing interest
tell from his general appearance, without much conception of social competition and such phenomena of absorbing interest.
stooped shoulders
much conception
crowd at the next table would not mistake him for a bird, too, he would enjoy the encounter tremendously.
St. Paul’s crowd
a Brentano’s clerk
books he had never heard of, rattling off lists of titles with the facility of a Brentano’s clerk.
a good-natured way
one part deadly grinds
one part deadly Philistines
any Oscar Wilde
man—don’t you know?”
A faint chord
struck in Amory’s memory.
Picture of Dorian Gray, and I certainly wish you’d read it.
You’d like it.
borrow it if you want to.”
addition of this friend would be.
the St. Paul’s group
the magnificent, exquisite Humbird
tortoise-rimmed spectacles
D’Invilliers’ undoubted attractions
hard enough for that—so he measured Thomas Parke D’Invilliers’ undoubted attractions and value against the menace of cold eyes behind tortoise-rimmed spectacles that he fancied glared from the next table.
sans Merci
keen on naught else.
the Mystic and Somber Dolores
“Fingal O’Flaherty
“Algernon Charles
tried hard to look at Princeton through the satiated eyes of Oscar Wilde and Swinburne—or “Fingal O’Flaherty” and “Algernon Charles,” as he called them in précieuse jest.
the satiated eyes
précieuse jest
just a heterogeneous mixture
the Savoy Operas
Tom D’Invilliers
became at first an occasion rather than a friend.
tall candlesticks
ceiling of Tom’s room and decorated the walls with imitation tapestry, bought at an auction, tall candlesticks and figured curtains.
imitation tapestry
Tom’s room
figured curtains
being clever and literary without effeminacy or affectation.
epigram, than which, if one is content with ostensible epigrams, there are many feats harder.
ostensible epigrams
addressing him as “Dorian” and pretending to encourage in him wicked fancies and attenuated tendencies to ennui.
simulated Lord Henry
made epigrams only before D’Invilliers or a convenient mirror.
poems to the music of Kerry’s graphophone.
Lord Dunsany’s poems
Kerry’s graphophone
record with less piano in it.
rolled on the floor in stifled laughter.
stifled laughter
the damn graphophone
conventional than he, and needed merely watered hair, a smaller range of conversation, and a darker brown hat to become quite regular.
brought him occasionally to 12 Univee.
heedless ears
Livingstone collars
mild titters
freshmen, who called them “Doctor Johnson and Boswell.”
a vague way
Connage, another frequent visitor, liked him in a vague way, but was afraid of him as a highbrow.
the solid, almost respectable depths
Amory’s sofa
lay with closed eyes on Amory’s sofa and listened: “Asleep or waking is it?
his poetic patter
the pained blood
wears yet a purple speck Wherein the pained blood falters and goes out; Soft and stung softly—fairer for a fleck.”
a purple speck
the elder Holiday
took to writing poetry on spring afternoons, in the gardens of the big estates near Princeton, while swans made effective atmosphere in the artificial pools, and slow clouds sailed harmoniously above the willows.
hours through starlight and rain.
 The night mist
moon it rolled, clustered about the spires and towers, and then settled below them, so that the dreaming peaks were still in lofty aspiration toward the sky.
lofty aspiration
shadowy ghosts
ants now brushed along as shadowy ghosts, in and out of the foreground.
out of the darkness, outlined each by myriad faint squares of yellow light.
myriad faint squares
the damp grass
stretched himself out full length on the damp grass.
the long spring twilights
flight of time—time that had crept so insidiously through the lazy April afternoons, seemed so intangible in the long spring twilights.
all they symbolized as warehouses of dead ages.
melancholy beauty
a deep and reverent devotion
holders of the apostolic succession.
the apostolic succession
its uppermost tip
architecture, with its upward trend, was peculiarly appropriate to universities, and the idea became personal to him.
its upward trend
a strong grasp
an occasional late-burning scholastic light
stretches of green, the quiet halls with an occasional late-burning scholastic light held his imagination in a strong grasp, and the chastity of the spire became a symbol of this perception.
it all,” he whispered aloud, wetting his hands in the damp and running them through his hair.
spirit of spires and towers made him dreamily acquiescent, it would then overawe him.
his own impotency
make him aware of his own impotency and insufficiency.
only his own inconsequence
dreamed on—awake.
the very throb
excitement that might have been the very throb of its slow heart.
whose faint ripple
stream where he was to throw a stone whose faint ripple would be vanishing almost as it left his hand.
A belated freshman
slushed along the soft path.
the inevitable formula
voice from somewhere called the inevitable formula, “Stick out your head!”
an unseen window
sounds of the current drifting on under the fog pressed in finally on his consciousness.
started at the sound of his voice in the stillness.
lay without moving, his hands clinched.
sprang to his feet and gave his clothes a tentative pat.
a tentative pat
said aloud to the sundial.
his freshman year
began in the summer following his freshman year.
dash for Paris the whole affair failed either to thrill or interest him.
an amusing melodrama
held toward an amusing melodrama he hoped it would be long and bloody.
an irate ticket-holder
prizefight where the principals refused to mix it up.
 “All right, ponies
“Hey, ponies
ponies—how about easing up on that crap game and shaking a mean hip?”
fits of temperamental lassitude, when he sat spiritless and wondered how the devil the show was ever going on tour by Christmas.
furious bursts
temperamental lassitude
the pirate song
drags at their cigarettes and slumped into place; the leading lady rushed into the foreground, setting his hands and feet in an atmospheric mince; and as the coach clapped and stamped and tumped and da-da’d, they hashed out a dance.
an atmospheric mince
A great, seething anthill
gave a musical comedy every year, travelling with cast, chorus, orchestra, and scenery all through Christmas vacation.
club itself was the most influential of institutions, over three hundred men competing for it every year.
Princetonian competition
sophomore Princetonian competition, stepped into a vacancy of the cast as Boiling Oil, a Pirate Lieutenant.
the first sophomore
a Pirate Lieutenant
Ha-Ha Hortense
rehearsed Ha-Ha Hortense!
from two in the afternoon until eight in the morning, sustained by dark and powerful coffee, and sleeping in lectures through the interim.
the cheerful tumpty-tump
A big, barnlike auditorium
course of being violently set up; the spotlight man rehearsing by throwing weird shafts into angry eyes; over all the constant tuning of the orchestra or the cheerful tumpty-tump of a Triangle tune.
perches on a box and thinks how much simpler it was in his day.
those damn milkmaid costumes
did enough service to wear a little gold Triangle on his watch-chain.
a riotous mystery
collaborators on the programme.
nine collaborators
just a regular musical comedy
the star comedian
the pony-ballet
the dark-whiskered man
started by being “something different—not just a regular musical comedy,” but when the several authors, the president, the coach and the faculty committee finished with it, there remained just the old reliable Triangle show with the old reliable jokes and the star comedian who got expelled or sick or something just before the trip, and the dark-whiskered man in the pony-ballet, who “absolutely won’t shave twice a day, doggone it!”
just the old reliable Triangle show
place in Ha-Ha Hortense!
the widely advertised Skull
tradition that whenever a Yale man who is a member of the widely advertised Skull and Bones hears the sacred name mentioned, he must leave the room.
are invariably successful in later life, amassing fortunes or votes or coupons or whatever they choose to amass.
the worst-looking vagabonds
hired from the streets, further touched up by the Triangle makeup man.
the six vagabonds
leave the theatre with looks of deep melancholy and an injured dignity.
the Pirate Chief
an injured dignity
swelled by one of the real thing.
the hired Elis
fashionable of eight cities.
furnished extraordinary punch
feminine beauty
an astonishing array
array of feminine beauty.
the Yale Glee Club
approved for a certain verve that transcended its loud accent—however, it was a Yale town, and as the Yale Glee Club was expected in a week the Triangle received only divided homage.
only divided homage
a certain verve
consumption of strong waters all along the line; one man invariably went on the stage highly stimulated, claiming that his particular interpretation of the part required it.
the spectacled windjammers
slept except in the third car, which was called the “animal car,” and where were herded the spectacled windjammers of the orchestra.
atmosphere of flowers and greasepaint, and the ponies took off their corsets with abdominal pains and sighs of relief.
abdominal pains
Sally Weatherby’s cousin
post haste
cousin, Isabelle Borgé, was coming to spend the winter in Minneapolis while her parents went abroad.
girl with whom he had played sometimes when he first went to Minneapolis.
full stride
was in full stride, confident, nervous, and jubilant.
the interesting and romantic thing
thing to do, so without compunction he wired his mother not to expect him.
thought about himself for thirty-six hours.
come into constant contact with that great current American phenomenon, the “petting party.”
that great current American phenomenon
most of the mothers were Victorian—had any idea how casually their daughters were accustomed to be kissed.
Mrs. Huston-Carmelite
says Mrs. Huston-Carmelite to her popular daughter.
match with young Hambell, of Cambell & Hambell, who fatuously considers himself her first love, and between engagements the P.D.
young Hambell
survival of the fittest) has other sentimental last kisses in the moonlight, or the firelight, or the outer darkness.
other sentimental last kisses
impossible cafés
stood for a real moral letdown.
a real moral letdown
a furtive excitement
was until he saw the cities between New York and Chicago as one vast juvenile intrigue.
one vast juvenile intrigue
Afternoon at the Plaza, with winter twilight hovering outside and faint drums downstairs.
winter twilight
outside and faint drums
strut and fret in the lobby, taking another cocktail, scrupulously attired and waiting.
bundles of fur mince in.
fur mince
the swinging doors
solitary state
the Midnight Frolic
the deserted table
thinks such entertainments as this are not half so bad as they are painted, only rather wearying.
was so much room left in the taxi the P.D. and the boy from Williams were somehow crowded out and had to go in a separate car.
was when she arrived just seven minutes late?
the “baby vamp
the “flirt
five or six callers
made pretty uncomfortable for the one who hasn’t a date with her.
men in the intermissions between dances.
P.D. between dances, just try to find her.
questioning of moral codes.
girl he met before eight he might quite possibly kiss before twelve.
someone’s limousine
the green combs
asked the girl with the green combs one night as they sat in someone’s limousine, outside the Country Club in Louisville.
come out here with you because I thought you were the best-looking girl in sight.
any of the things you said?
sleeveless jerseys
were stylish, Amory, in a burst of inspiration, named them “petting shirts.”
travelled from coast to coast on the lips of parlor-snakes and P.D.s.
the penetrating green eyes
long dark eyelashes
fringed with long dark eyelashes.
that intense animal magnetism
a water-faucet
off like a water-faucet.
paused at the top of the staircase.
ladies on opening nights, and lumpy, husky young men on the day of the Big Game, crowded through her.
lumpy, husky young men
a discordant blend
descended to a burst of drums or a discordant blend of themes from Thais and Carmen.
been sixteen years old for six months.
cousin Sally from the doorway of the dressing-room.
a slight lump
caught a slight lump of nervousness in her throat.
send back to the house for another pair of slippers.
the broad stairs
started toward the dressing-room for a last peek in the mirror, but something decided her to stand there and gaze down the broad stairs of the Minnehaha Club.
a last peek
masculine feet
glimpse of two pairs of masculine feet in the hall below.
just a glimpse
hint of identity, but she wondered eagerly if one pair were attached to Amory Blaine.
rain of question, comment, revelation, and exaggeration: “You remember Amory Blaine, of course.
stayed over a day from college, and he’s coming tonight.
capable of staging her own romances, with or without advance advertising.
a sinking sensation
came a sinking sensation that made her ask: “How do you mean he’s heard about me?
her happy tremble
her more exotic cousin
felt rather in the capacity of a showman with her more exotic cousin.
this Isabelle’s little fist
clinched suddenly under the fur robe.
the fur robe
an advantageous reputation
was an advantageous reputation.
watched the snow glide by in the frosty morning.
the frosty morning
glass of the side door was iced, the windows were shirred with snow in the corners.
dress like that boy there, who walked calmly down a bustling business street, in moccasins and winter-carnival costume?
a bustling business street
went to Princeton, was a sophomore or something.
eyes (which he had probably grown up to by now).
assumed the proportions of a worthy adversary.
a worthy adversary
a clever correspondence sonata
sonata to Isabelle’s excitable temperament.
Isabelle’s excitable temperament
been for some time capable of very strong, if very transient emotions.
if very transient emotions
drew up at a spreading, white-stone building, set back from the snowy street.
the snowy street
her various younger cousins
produced from the corners where they skulked politely.
allied all with whom she came in contact—except older girls and some women.
much by her direct personality as by her reputation.
had an affair with him at some time or other, but no one volunteered any really useful information.
set eyes on Isabelle.
necessary, force herself to like him—she owed it to Sally.
painted him in such glowing colors—he was good-looking, “sort of distinguished, when he wants to be,” had a line, and was properly inconstant.
such glowing colors
foxtrotted tentatively around the soft rug below.
kaleidoscopic to Isabelle.
mixture of the social and the artistic temperaments found often in two classes, society women and actresses.
the artistic temperaments
susceptible within telephone distance.
her intense physical magnetism
shone through her intense physical magnetism.
head of the stairs that evening while slippers were fetched.
came out of the dressing-room, beaming with her accustomed good nature and high spirits, and together they descended to the floor below, while the shifting searchlight of Isabelle’s mind flashed on two ideas: she was glad she had high color tonight, and she wondered if he danced well.
her accustomed good nature
the shifting searchlight
Isabelle’s mind
met in the afternoon, then she heard Sally’s voice repeating a cycle of names, and found herself bowing to a sextet of black and white, terribly stiff, vaguely familiar figures.
Sally’s voice
the club’s great room
black and white, terribly stiff, vaguely familiar figures
name Blaine figured somewhere,
talking to the person he least desired to.
awkward backings
A very confused, very juvenile moment
maneuvered herself and Froggy Parker, freshman at Harvard, with whom she had once played hopscotch, to a seat on the stairs.
A humorous reference
things Isabelle could do socially with one idea were remarkable.
the nominal form
soupçon of Southern accent; then she held it off at a distance and smiled at it—her wonderful smile; then she delivered it in variations and played a sort of mental catch with it, all this in the nominal form of dialogue.
an enthusiastic contralto
the shining carefully watered hair
discovered Amory.
her own conscious magnetism
flush of her own conscious magnetism gets a deep impression of most of the people in the front row, so Isabelle sized up her antagonist.
knew that she had expected him to be dark and of garter-advertisement slenderness.
garter-advertisement slenderness
a silk ruffled shirt
way over to their table.
struggled to Isabelle’s side, and whispered: “You’re my dinner partner, you know.
Isabelle’s side
taken from the star and given to a minor character.
confusion of getting places and then curious eyes were turned on her, sitting near the head.
the added sparkle
fell into a dim confusion.
Sally’s chair
open admiration
full of confidence and vanity, gazing at her in open admiration.
heard a lot about you since you wore braids—” “Wasn’t it funny this afternoon—” Both stopped.
turned to Amory shyly.
her right Froggy
was hors de combat already, although he hadn’t quite realized it.
hors de combat
remembered about you all these years,” Amory continued.
looked modestly at the celery before her.
situations that Amory seemed born to handle.
away to school next year.
opened with grapeshot.
adjective that just fits you.”
a curiosity provoker
got in a tight corner.
study in enraptured curiosity.
enraptured curiosity
Isabelle’s face
touched his under the table.
wondered quickly if there would be any difficulty in securing the little den upstairs.
had very little value in the game they were playing, a game that would presumably be her principal study for years to come.
an excitable temperament
begun as he had, with good looks and an excitable temperament, and the rest was the result of accessible popular novels and dressing-room conversation culled from a slightly older set.
an artificial gait
walked with an artificial gait at nine and a half, and when her eyes, wide and starry, proclaimed the ingenue most, Amory was proportionately less deceived.
blasé sophistication
impressed by his studied air of blasé sophistication.
coached; he knew that he stood for merely the best game in sight, and that he would have to improve his opportunity before he lost his advantage.
an infinite guile
guile that would have horrified her parents.
pressure that said: “You know that your dances are making my evening.”
a parting pressure
found Isabelle and Amory sitting on the couch in the little den off the reading-room upstairs.
the less subtle beaux
their pseudo-passionate glances
eleven o’clock
fluttered and chattered downstairs.
a handsome pair
a very definite stage
the Princetonian board
some of the boys she went with in Baltimore were “terrible speeds” and came to dances in states of artificial stimulation; most of them were twenty or so, and drove alluring red Stutzes.
alluring red Stutzes
artificial stimulation
names that made him look at her admiringly.
acquaintance with the universities was just commencing.
Isabelle’s closer acquaintance
lot of young men who thought she was a “pretty kid—worth keeping an eye on.”
fabrication of gayety that would have dazzled a Viennese nobleman.
a Viennese nobleman
power of young contralto voices on sink-down sofas.
sink-down sofas
young contralto voices
asked her if she thought he was conceited.
difference between conceit and self-confidence.
a bum dancer
dances as if the girl were on his back instead of in his arms.”
awfully nice hands
look as if you played the piano.
nay, more, a very critical stage.
left at twelve-eighteen that night.
talking lightly about “that funny look in her eyes,” and Isabelle knew from the change in his manner what was coming—indeed, she had been wondering how soon it would come.
were in the dark, except for the red glow that fell through the door from the reading-room lamps.
meet again like this—I have darned hard luck sometimes.”
see his eyes plainly in the dark.
became almost a term of endearment.
chin on his hands: “Oh, what’s the use—you’ll go your way and I suppose I’ll go mine.”
the faint light
streamed over her, dropped it deliberately on the floor.
another stray couple
understand We’re off to slumberland.”
a light tenor
felt Amory’s hand close over hers.
give a darn about me.”
bent so near that he felt her breath against his cheek.
stirred so that he half wondered whether she had spoken at all.
swung the door softly shut, the music seemed quivering just outside.
scene in the den, with their hands clinging and the inevitable looming charmingly close.
warm limousines
low, cosy roadsters
pale starlight
an unending succession
succession of scenes like this: under moonlight and pale starlight, and in the backs of warm limousines and in low, cosy roadsters stopped under sheltering trees—only the boy might change, and this one was so nice.
running footsteps
ring of voices, the sound of running footsteps surged toward them.
a flash Amory
sat without moving, serene and unembarrassed, and even greeted them with a welcoming smile.
dance-craving Froggy
passed between them—on his side despair, on hers regret, and then the evening went on, with the reassured beaux and the eternal cutting in.
the reassured beaux
his side despair
quarter to twelve Amory shook hands with her gravely, in the midst of a small crowd assembled to wish him good-speed.
a satirical voice
rattled when a satirical voice from a concealed wit cried: “Take her outside, Amory!”
a concealed wit
returned the pressure as she had done to twenty hands that evening—that was all.
back at the Weatherbys’ Sally asked her if she and Amory had had a “time” in the den.
two o’clock
turned to her quietly.
the inviolate dreamer
was the light of the idealist, the inviolate dreamer of Joan-like dreams.
crept in bed she wondered what he’d say in his special delivery tomorrow.
Fourteen angels
sang Sally sleepily from the next room.
muttered Isabelle, punching the pillow into a luxurious lump and exploring the cold sheets cautiously.
a luxurious lump
way of the Princetonian, had arrived.
finely balanced thermometers
The minor snobs
snobs, finely balanced thermometers of success, warmed to him as the club elections grew nigh, and he and Tom were visited by groups of upper classmen who arrived awkwardly, balanced on the edge of the furniture and talked of all subjects except the one of absorbing interest.
took great pleasure in shocking them with unorthodox remarks.
unorthodox remarks
said one night to a flabbergasted delegation, “what club do you represent?”
a flabbergasted delegation
visitors from Ivy and Cottage and Tiger Inn he played the “nice, unspoilt, ingenuous boy” very much at ease and quite unaware of the object of the call.
Ivy and Cottage and Tiger Inn
the “nice, unspoilt, ingenuous boy
his suddenly neurotic class
document in hysteria, he slid smoothly into Cottage with Alec Connage and watched his suddenly neurotic class with much wonder.
snarling disclosures of long-hidden grudges as the Suddenly Prominent remembered snubs of freshman year.
the Suddenly Prominent remembered snubs
freshman year
fickle groups
long-hidden grudges
all set” found that they had made unexpected enemies, felt themselves stranded and deserted, talked wildly of leaving college.
certain coveted bids
unfathomable secret reasons
known to no one but the wielders of the black balls.
a damn tailor’s dummy
dispensed from immense bowls, and the whole downstairs became a delirious, circulating, shouting pattern of faces and voices.
the Nassau Inn
a gigantic party
immense bowls
a delirious, circulating, shouting pattern
“Goo’ boy
all the weightlifters
went Tiger with all the weightlifters!”
the parlor-snakes’ delight
Cottage—the parlor-snakes’ delight.”
day?—oh, no.
the first day?—oh
his Ivy bid
Tore over to Murray-Dodge on a bicycle—afraid it was a mistake.”
get into Cap—you old roué?”
Gratulations yourself.
the snow-clad campus
a weird delusion
pleased for the next two years.
sophomore spring
a dozen newfound friendships
enjoy a dozen newfound friendships through the April afternoons.
sunshine and peculiar glory of Campbell Hall shining in the window.
peculiar glory
front of Renwick’s in half an hour.
load of small articles, upon the bed.
a critical goopher
reaching beside the bed for a cigarette.
“You damned gloom
the bureau cover’s burden
a bound Amory
was out of bed, scattering the bureau cover’s burden on the floor.
were on their pilgrimage.
demanded as he wriggled into his B.V.D.s.
“Oh, Dick Humbird
devouring cornflakes in Renwick’s, and at nine-thirty they bowled happily out of town, headed for the sands of Deal Beach.
stolen from Asbury Park by persons unknown, who deserted it in Princeton and left for the West.
suggested Ferrenby, turning around from the front seat.
an emphatic negative chorus
ability for three short days?
Kerry’s ability
One of the days is the Sabbath.”
cut six more classes, with over a month and a half to go.”
get some dope on yourself, Amory?”
contemplation of the scenery.
night that wins; And time remembered is grief forgotten, And frosts are slain and flowers begotten, And in green underwood and cover, Blossom by blossom the spring begins.
green underwood
winter’s rains
feed on flower of—” “What’s the matter, Amory?
thinking about the Princetonian.
a defeated competitor
Ferrenby, a defeated competitor, winced a little.
neared the shore and the salt breezes scurried by, he began to picture the ocean and long, level stretches of sand and red roofs over blue sea.
a halcyon day
the salt breezes
paean of emotion.
a mighty paean
Oh, gentlefolk
drawn up at a curb, and Amory ran for the boardwalk.
all the banalities
banalities about the ocean that one could realize, but if anyone had told him then that these things were banalities, he would have gaped in wonder.
wandering up with the crowd.
the most imposing hostelry
scattered about a table.
chair where he could watch the sea and feel the rock of it.
sat and smoked quietly.
“Rotten overcharge
one for the waiter.
tossed two dollars on the check, and turned away.
sauntered leisurely toward the door, pursued in a moment by the suspicious Ganymede.
the suspicious Ganymede
stood motionless and expressionless while they walked out.
the proprietor’s sons
the crowded pavilions
Allenhurst, where they investigated the crowded pavilions for beauty.
time they paid an even smaller percent on the total cost; something about the appearance and savoir-faire of the crowd made the thing go, and they were not pursued.
Marxian Socialists
strolled up and down the boardwalk in a row, chanting a monotonous ditty about the sad sea waves.
a monotonous ditty
the homeliest girls
one of the homeliest girls Amory had ever set eyes on.
little, squinty eyes
the side sweep
a solid wedge
sweep of her nose.
Name of Kaluka, Hawaiian queen!
noticed in her life—possibly she was half-witted.
nothing which could discountenance such a belief.
any coarse food
said Alec gravely to the waiter, “but any coarse food will do.”
the most respectful language
made idiotic love to her on the other side, and she giggled and grinned.
idiotic love
thing of curve and contour.
spirit of it more or less, and it was a relaxation to be with them.
feared them in crowds unless the crowd was around him.
was somewhat of a spiritual tax levied.
his impatient superciliousness
the quiet Humbird
Humbird, and Sloane, with his impatient superciliousness, were the centre.
seemed to Amory a perfect type of aristocrat.
slender but well-built—black curly hair
Everything he said sounded intangibly appropriate.
an averagely good mind
sense of honor with a clear charm and noblesse oblige that varied it from righteousness.
dissipate without going to pieces, and even his most bohemian adventures never seemed “running it out.”
even his most bohemian adventures
type that was essentially middle class—he never seemed to perspire.
familiar with a chauffeur without having it returned; Humbird could have lunched at Sherry’s with a colored man, yet people would have somehow known that it was all right.
highest to the lowest, but it was impossible to “cultivate” him.
example of what the upper class tries to be.
’s like those pictures in the Illustrated London News of the English officers who have been killed,” Amory had said to Alec.
was a grocery clerk who made a fortune in Tacoma real estate and came to New York ten years ago.”
Tacoma real estate
the shocking truth
a curious sinking sensation
surging together of the class after club elections—as if to make a last desperate attempt to know itself, to keep together, to fight off the tightening spirit of the clubs.
the tightening spirit
heights they had all walked so rigidly.
saw Kaluka to the boardwalk, and then strolled back along the beach to Asbury.
all its color and mellow age
the bleak waste
a new sensation
Kipling’s “Beaches
thought of Kipling’s “Beaches of Lukanon before the sealers came.”
the Norse sagas
Ten o’clock
arches on the boardwalk, stopping to listen approvingly to all band concerts.
collection for the French War Orphans which netted a dollar and twenty cents, and with this they bought some brandy in case they caught cold in the night.
the French War Orphans
the startled annoyance
solemn systematic roars
annoyance of the rest of the audience.
was distinctly strategic, for each man as he entered pointed reproachfully at the one just behind him.
the irate ticket-taker
followed nonchalantly.
sleep on the platform and, having collected a huge pile of rugs from the booths to serve as mattresses and blankets, they talked until midnight, and then fell into a dreamless sleep, though Amory tried hard to stay awake and watch that marvellous moon settle on the sea.
a huge pile
marvellous moon
a dreamless sleep
the crowded boardwalk
an unsuspecting restaurateur
eating with the wealthy, more frequently dining frugally at the expense of an unsuspecting restaurateur.
poses, in a quick-development store.
gang from the East Side, with their coats inside out, and himself sitting in the middle on a cardboard moon.
a “varsity” football team
a cardboard moon
broke up with colds in their heads, but otherwise none the worse for wandering.
transient farmers
neglected his work, not deliberately but lazily and through a multitude of other interests.
the melancholy hexameters
a dull subject
full of muscular reactions and biological phrases rather than the study of personality and influence.
muscular reactions
small allurements
nudged awake by Ferrenby or Sloane to gasp it out.
fourteen waitresses
top of an auto bus.
their colorful ramblings
classes than were allowed, which meant an additional course the following year, but spring was too rare to let anything interfere with their colorful ramblings.
the Sophomore Prom Committee
a tentative list
a long evening’s discussion
elected to the Sophomore Prom Committee, and when after a long evening’s discussion with Alec they made out a tentative list of class probabilities for the senior council, they placed themselves among the surest.
Alec’s football managership
Amory’s chance
the eighteen most representative seniors
justified in this presumption.
they both placed D’Invilliers as among the possibilities, a guess that a year before the class would have gaped at.
correspondence with Isabelle Borgé, punctuated by violent squabbles and chiefly enlivened by his attempts to find new words for love.
an intermittent correspondence
violent squabbles
hope that she would prove not too exotic a bloom to fit the large spaces of spring as she had fitted the den in the Minnehaha Club.
not too exotic a bloom
bulky envelopes
wrote thirty-page documents almost nightly, and sent them to her in bulky envelopes exteriorly labelled “Part I” and “Part II.”
walked the dusk together.
home in the country, some warm country, and a wife, and just enough to do to keep from rotting.”
gasped in horror.
think of marrying.
forthcoming as it used to be.”
picture before him, write her rapturous letters.
her rapturous letters
put on paper any more.
read it over about six times, especially the last part, but I do wish, sometimes, you’d be more frank and tell me what you really do think of me, yet your last letter was too good to be true, and I can hardly wait until June!
come to the prom.
end of a wonderful year.
said on that night and wonder how much you meant.
imagine you really liking me best.
playing “Love Moon” on a mandolin far across the campus, and the music seems to bring you into the window.
Goodbye, Boys, I’m Through,” and how well it suits me.
part of my days and nights to ever let me think of another girl.
pretending to be blasé, because it’s not that.
just Isabelle
come up to your house for a day and everything’ll be perfect.
an eternal monotone
both of them infinitely charming, infinitely new.
dreamy evenings
gave way to silent cigarettes.
a blue haze
the hot joviality
up to the hot joviality of Nassau Street.
three o’clock
the sophomore class
swept through the sophomore class and they bent over the bones till three o’clock many a sultry night.
came out of Sloane’s room to find the dew fallen and the stars old in the sky.
Sloane’s room
the prom stuff
the Lawrenceville Road
three along the Lawrenceville Road.
be there in July, you know—then there’ll be Minneapolis, and that means hundreds of summer hops, parlor-snaking, getting bored—
I’m counting
feel as if I never want to play another.
the local snobbishness
go where people aren’t barred because of the color of their neckties and the roll of their coats.”
the scattering night
rolled along through the scattering night; “wherever you go now you’ll always unconsciously apply these standards of ‘having it’ or ‘lacking it.’
stamped you; you’re a Princeton type!”
mere pedantry
lying around a club aren’t going to help.
opened to the snobbishness of the world in a rather abrupt manner.
a rather abrupt manner
the thoughtful man
eying Amory in the half dark.
’s rather hard.
the mean scrambling quality
gone through blind, and you’d hate to have done that—been like Marty Kaye.”
made a cynic at twenty.”
a cynical idealist
school of Lawrenceville, and turned to ride back.
a hot, languorous summer
said Amory as he finished.
only a few obvious things
music at night, the sea; I don’t catch the subtle things like ‘silver-snarling trumpets.’
‘silver-snarling trumpets
anything but mediocre poetry.”
mediocre poetry
serve in place of sleep.
banners that curled and strained in the wind.
the bright-costumed alumni
legend “Sixty-nine.”
talked quietly while the classes swept by in panorama of life.
a few gray-haired men
tragedy’s emerald eyes
sallied to New York in quest of adventure, and started back to Princeton about twelve o’clock in two machines.
about twelve o’clock
stages of sobriety were represented.
was in the car behind; they had taken the wrong road and lost the way, and so were hurrying to catch up.
Amory’s head
exhilaration of the road went to Amory’s head.
two stanzas
stanzas of a poem forming in his mind.
life stirred as it went by.
the moon-swathed trees
shark in starred and glittering waterways, beauty-high, the moon-swathed trees divided, pair on pair, while flapping nightbirds cried across the air.
starred and glittering waterways
flapping nightbirds
crescendo laughter
moment by an inn of lamps and shades, a yellow inn under a yellow moon—then silence, where crescendo laughter fades.
swung out again to the winds of June, mellowed the shadows where the distance grew, then crushed the yellow shadows into blue.
jolted to a stop, and Amory peered up, startled.
talking to Alec at the wheel.
the cracked hollowness
the harpy effect
her old kimono
gazed in horror.
a widening circle
light of a roadside arc-light lay a form, face downward in a widening circle of blood.
a roadside arc-light
back of that head—that hair—that hair.
Dick—Dick Humbird!”
sort of croaking triumph: “He’s quite dead, all right.
croaking triumph
the insistent voice
the old crone
Two of the men that weren’t hurt just carried the others in, but this one’s no use.”
the shoddy little front parlor
mass that they laid on the sofa in the shoddy little front parlor.
a limp mass
lecture at 8:10.
Ferrenby in a strained voice.
a strained voice
dry sobs
threw himself face downward on the floor and broke into dry sobs.
went over to the couch, where someone handed him a sheet to put over the body.
a sudden hardness
raised one of the hands and let it fall back inertly.
looked at the shoelaces—Dick had tied them that morning.
the Dick Humbird
charm and personality of the Dick Humbird he had known—oh, it was all so horrible and unaristocratic and close to the earth.
strain of the grotesque and squalid—so useless, futile.
mangled in some alley of his childhood.
go to Princeton with Ferrenby.”
a broken fender
wind that stirred a broken fender on the mass of bent metal to a plaintive, tinny sound.
a plaintive, tinny sound
a merciful chance
passed in a whirl.
effort he piled present excitement upon the memory of it and shut it coldly away from his mind.
smiling Prospect Avenue, through the gay crowd, to have tea at Cottage.
the upper classmen
admitted to the freshman dance.
the freshman dance
the freshman torchlight parade
stood in front of the clubs as the freshman torchlight parade rioted past, and Amory wondered if the dress-suited groups against the dark, stately backgrounds and under the flare of the torches made the night as brilliant to the staring, cheering freshmen as it had been to him the year before.
the dark, stately backgrounds
cheering freshmen
the fried chicken
looked at each other tenderly over the fried chicken and knew that their love was to be eternal.
cut in on Isabelle with joyous abandon, which grew more and more enthusiastic as the hour grew late, and their wines, stored in overcoat pockets in the coat room, made old weariness wait until another day.
overcoat pockets
joyous abandon
old weariness
a most homogeneous mass
The stag line
sways with a single soul.
A dark-haired beauty dances
surges forward and someone sleeker than the rest darts out and cuts in.
a half-gasping sound
brought by Kaye in your class, and to whom he has been trying to introduce you all evening) gallops by, the line surges back and the groups face about and become intent on far corners of the hall, for Kaye, anxious and perspiring, appears elbowing through the crowd in search of familiar faces.
cut in on a fella.”
look me up when she’s got a dance free.”
drive around in her car.
shy excitement
surface of their hearts in shy excitement.
play at which Isabelle wept all through the second act, rather to Amory’s embarrassment—though it filled him with tenderness to watch her.
Amory’s embarrassment
cover of darkness to be pressed softly.
the Borgés’ summer place
arrived at the Borgés’ summer place on Long Island, and Amory rushed upstairs to change into a dinner coat.
enjoying life as he would probably never enjoy it again.
haze of his own youth.
best in his generation at Princeton.
looked at himself in the mirror, trying to find in his own face the qualities that made him see clearer than the great crowd of people, that made him decide firmly, and able to influence and follow his own will.
waited at the top of the stairs, for he heard footsteps coming.
top of her shining hair to her little golden slippers she had never seemed so beautiful.
her little golden slippers
his young egotism
rested the high point of vanity, the crest of his young egotism.
spot about the size of a pea marred its pallor.
disappear in a second.”
’s still there—and it looks like Old Nick—oh, Amory, what’ll we do!
inclination to laugh.
the faintest inclination
gathered in the corner of her eye, and slid down her cheek.
a most pathetic face
make my whole neck flame if I rub it.
sailed into his head and he couldn’t resist repeating it aloud.
perfumes of Arabia will not whiten this little hand.”
sparkle of the tear in her eye was like ice.
Isabelle, darling, I think it’ll—” “Don’t touch me!”
sense of humor being—” She was looking at him with something that was not a smile, rather the faint, mirthless echo of a smile, in the corners of her mouth.
rather the faint, mirthless echo
fled down the hallway toward her room.
covered with remorseful confusion.
remorseful confusion
wrap about her shoulders, and they descended the stairs in a silence that endured through dinner.
be, too, in a minute.
the Greenwich Country Club
kept his temper with difficulty.
real affection
affection for Isabelle, but her coldness piqued him.
wanted to kiss her, kiss her a lot, because then he knew he could leave in the morning and not care.
interfere vaguely with his idea of himself as a conqueror.
a doughty warrior
pleading, with a doughty warrior like Isabelle.
great moths
roadside gardens
night that should have been the consummation of romance glide by with great moths overhead and the heavy fragrance of roadside gardens, but without those broken words, those little sighs.
food in the pantry, and Amory announced a decision.
devil’s food
ginger ale
put it that way,” he objected.
isn’t as if you were refusing on moral grounds.”
think about you,” she began, in a feeble, perverse attempt at conciliation.
a feeble, perverse attempt
world, the way you talk!
anybody else on your old Princetonian; maybe the freshmen do think you’re important—” “You don’t understand—” “Yes, I do,” she interrupted.
your old Princetonian
do, because you’re always talking about yourself and I used to like it; now I don’t.”
talking to you—you’re so critical.”
touch of vanity.
have ’em.”
every little emotion
foot of the stairs.
’s one about 9:11 if you really must go.”
head of the stairs, and as Amory turned into his room he thought he caught just the faintest cloud of discontent in her face.
just the faintest cloud
his sudden unhappiness
unfitted for romance.
the chintz curtains
picture over the bureau and the Triangle Club on the wall opposite.
the grandfather’s clock
dressing, like the wind; he must get out of the house before he saw Isabelle.
a melancholy happening
seemed a tiresome anticlimax.
a tiresome anticlimax
dressed at half past, so he sat down by the window; felt that the sinews of his heart were twisted somewhat more than he had thought.
Mrs. Borgé’s voice
voice in the sun-parlor below, he wondered where was Isabelle.
Browning, which he had once quoted to Isabelle in a letter: “Each life unfulfilled, you see, It hangs still, patchy and scrappy; We have not sighed deep, laughed free, Starved, feasted, despaired—been happy.”
read into her; that this was her high point, that no one else would ever make her think.
a sombre satisfaction
a dusty day
the sweltering crowd
men who thronged the streets.
the stuffy room
a tutoring school
the infinite boredom
seemed a stupid way to commence his upper-class years, to spend four hours a morning in the stuffy room of a tutoring school, imbibing the infinite boredom of conic sections.
conic sections
drew diagrams and worked equations from six in the morning until midnight.
innumerable Pall Malls
three of football material and tries to concentrate.
damned if I know, Mr. Rooney.”
wish you’d go over that again.”
all these prominent athletes
; “Slim” Langueduc
gay young sophomore
McDowell, gay young sophomore, who thought it was quite a sporting thing to be tutoring here with all these prominent athletes.
a flaccid camaraderie
birds who haven’t a cent to tutor, and have to study during the term are the ones I pity,” he announced to Amory one day, with a flaccid camaraderie in the droop of the cigarette from his pale lips.
such a bore
do in New York during the term.
air of “you and I” about Mr. McDowell that Amory very nearly pushed him out of the open window when he said this.
dense earnestness
the inevitable helpless cry
come the inevitable helpless cry: “I don’t get it!
Most of them were so stupid or careless that they wouldn’t admit when they didn’t understand, and Amory was of the latter.
insoluble anagrams
their calm and tantalizing respectability
Mr. Rooney’s fetid parlors
something in their calm and tantalizing respectability breathing defiantly through Mr. Rooney’s fetid parlors distorted their equations into insoluble anagrams.
a last night’s effort
the proverbial wet towel
color and ambition of the spring before had faded out.
defection of Isabelle the idea of undergraduate success had loosed its grasp on his imagination, and he contemplated a possible failure to pass off his condition with equanimity, even though it would arbitrarily mean his removal from the Princetonian board and the slaughter of his chances for the Senior Council.
sauntered from the room.
wall decoration
the world’s worst goopher
the newly arrived Alec
’re the world’s worst goopher.
go down like an elevator at the club and on the campus.”
risk what you were in line for ought to be ineligible for Princetonian chairman.”
asking me about it, as if I were a prize potato being fattened for a vegetable show.”
stopped below his own window on the way to Renwick’s, and, seeing a light, called up: “Oh, Tom, any mail?”
Alec’s head
over to the table, and then suddenly noticed that there were other people in the room.
“Registrar’s Office
envelope marked “Registrar’s Office,” and weighed it nervously.
withdrawn from the editorial board of the Prince, and my short career is over.”
time Ferrenby’s eyes, wearing a hungry look and watching him eagerly.
Ferrenby’s eyes
the primitive emotions
Watch my face, gentlemen, for the primitive emotions.”
held the slip up to the light.
crowd of seconds swept by.
from early September to late in the spring was so purposeless and inconsecutive that it seems scarcely worth recording.
philosophy of success had tumbled down upon him, and he looked for the reasons.
stage a comeback.”
power in college is concerned.”
chairman of the Prince and on the Senior Council, but just that you didn’t get down and pass that exam.”
My own idleness
accord with my system, but the luck broke.”
bum around for two more years as a has-been?”
“Oh, Amory
Amory, buck up!”
Amory’s point
beginning with his earliest years:
The fundamental Amory
pulled him to pieces and started him over again: Amory plus St. Regis’.
approach to success through conformity.
chucked the whole thing and become again: The fundamental Amory.
died quietly and inconspicuously at Thanksgiving.
an amused tolerance
his mother’s dignified, reticent attitude
incongruity of death with either the beauties of Lake Geneva or with his mother’s dignified, reticent attitude diverted him, and he looked at the funeral with an amused tolerance.
slow oxidation
his old boyhood choice
couch in graceful mortuary attitudes, trying to determine whether he would, when his day came, be found with his arms crossed piously over his chest (Monsignor Darcy had once advocated this posture as being the most distinguished), or with his hands clasped behind his head, a more pagan and Byronic attitude.
a more pagan and Byronic attitude
graceful mortuary attitudes
a tri-cornered conversation
took place several days after the funeral.
a tidy fortune
actual cognizance
his father’s management
came into actual cognizance of the family finances, and realized what a tidy fortune had once been under his father’s management.
Beatrice’s own income
letters of credit forwarded to Beatrice Blaine.”
Beatrice’s electric
the general upkeep
upkeep, including Beatrice’s electric and a French car, bought that year, was over thirty-five thousand dollars.
balance on the right side of the ledger.
volume for 1912 Amory was shocked to discover the decrease in the number of bond holdings and the great drop in the income.
gambles in oil.
several unfortunate gambles
Beatrice’s money
little of the oil had been burned, but Stephen Blaine had been rather badly singed.
had for the first time begun using her own money for keeping up the house.
bill for 1913 had been over nine thousand dollars.
her doctor’s bill
state of things Mr. Barton was quite vague and confused.
speculations and exchanges concerning which he had not been consulted.
further speculations
was not for several months that Beatrice wrote Amory the full situation.
residue of the Blaine and O’Hara fortunes consisted of the place at Lake Geneva and approximately a half million dollars, invested now in fairly conservative six-per-cent holdings.
The entire residue
O’Hara fortunes
approximately a half million dollars
putting the money into railroad and streetcar bonds as fast as she could conveniently transfer it.
railroad and streetcar bonds
call the streetcars.
forgive myself for not buying Bethlehem Steel.
go into finance, Amory.
revel in it.
start as a messenger or a teller, I believe, and from that you go up—almost indefinitely.
quite a senile passion
man I’d love the handling of money; it has become quite a senile passion with me.
wore their summer underwear all during the winter, and also went about with their heads wet and in low shoes on the coldest days.
an overcordial little lady
A Mrs. Bispam
fad at Princeton too, but I don’t want you to be so foolish.
are particularly inclined.
infantile paralysis
make myself ridiculous as some mothers no doubt do, by insisting that you wear overshoes, though I remember one Christmas you wore them around constantly without a single buckle latched, making such a curious swishing sound, and you refused to buckle them because it was not the thing to do.
such a curious swishing sound
a single buckle
wear even rubbers, though I begged you.
be with you constantly to find whether you are doing the sensible thing.
the sensible thing
lack of money to do the things one wants to makes one quite prosy and domestic, but there is still plenty for everything if we are not too extravagant.
Take care of yourself, my dear boy, and do try to write at least once a week, because I imagine all sorts of horrible things if I don’t hear from you.
Affectionately, Mother
week at Christmas, and they had enormous conversations around the open fire.
 Monsignor Darcy
the middle-aged sanity
sanity of a cigar.
a squat, cushioned chair
felt like leaving college, Monsignor.”
gone up in smoke; you think it’s petty and all that, but—” “Not at all petty.
doing since I saw you last.”
the listless quality
his egotistic highways
do if you left college?” asked Monsignor.
this tiresome war
go over with him and join the Lafayette Esquadrille.”
the Lafayette Esquadrille
tired of life than I think you are.
out of everything—when I think of another useless, draggy year.”
another useless, draggy year
bit of it!” scoffed Monsignor.
amount of vanity and that’s all.”
form at St. Regis’s.”
be through the channels you were searching last year.”
lack of pep?”
casting off a lot of your old luggage about success and the superman and all.
hour a day to think in, we can accomplish marvels, but as far as any high-handed scheme of blind dominance is concerned—we’d just make asses of ourselves.”
blind dominance
Amory, between you and me, I have only just learned to do it myself.
stubbed your toe on mathematics this fall.”
have to do it because we’re not personalities, but personages.”
tell me of evidently are.
a long sickness
lowers the people it acts on—I’ve seen it vanish in a long sickness.
is active, it overrides ‘the next thing.’
apart from what he’s done.
a cold mentality
glittering things
fallen off when I needed them.”
my most glittering possessions
your garnered prestige
bother about anybody; you can cope with them without difficulty.”
haven’t my possessions, I’m helpless!”
start—a start Kerry or Sloane can constitutionally never have.
brushed three or four ornaments down, and, in a fit of pique, knocked off the rest of them.
three or four ornaments
look ahead in the collecting the better.
talked, often about themselves, sometimes of philosophy and religion, and life as respectively a game or a mystery.
Amory’s thoughts
were clear in his own head, so closely related were their minds in form and groove.
passion for classifying and finding a type.”
desire to get something definite.”
nucleus of scholastic philosophy.”
scholastic philosophy
more egotistic food
returned to college he received several letters from Monsignor which gave him more egotistic food for consumption.
your inevitable safety
faith in your springs of effort; not in the silly conviction that you will arrive without struggle.
careful in confessing them to others.
vain without being proud.
4 p.m.
the genial golden warmth
the melancholy brilliance
brilliance of the moon, and when you are my age you will give out, as I do, the genial golden warmth of 4 p.m. If you write me letters, please let them be natural ones.
really antagonistic contact
a supercilious label
come into really antagonistic contact with the world.
an intellectual and emotional vacuum
a more valuable beacon
be a more valuable beacon to you at present.
did in my youth, but do keep your clarity of mind, and if fools or sages dare to criticise don’t blame yourself too much.
that half-miraculous sixth sense
all that really keeps you straight in this “woman proposition”; but it’s more than that, Amory; it’s the fear that what you begin you can’t stop; you would run amuck, and I know whereof I speak; it’s that half-miraculous sixth sense by which you detect evil, it’s the half-realized fear of God in your heart.
yawns beneath you.
the “black chasm
affectionate regards
the misty side streets
paled during this period; he delved further into the misty side streets of literature: Huysmans, Walter Pater, Theophile Gautier, and the racier sections of Rabelais, Boccaccio, Petronius, and Suetonius.
Even Amory’s reading
general curiosity
battered, annotated schoolbooks
, Jr.
Fox, Jr., and Richard Harding Davis; What Every Middle-Aged Woman Ought to Know, The Spell of the Yukon; a “gift” copy of James Whitcomb Riley, an assortment of battered, annotated schoolbooks, and, finally, to his surprise, one of his own late discoveries, the collected poems of Rupert Brooke.
the Great American Poetic Tradition
sought among the lights of Princeton for someone who might found the Great American Poetic Tradition.
been the entirely Philistine Princeton of two years before.
the entirely Philistine Princeton
much of the spontaneous charm of freshman year.
the spontaneous charm
discovered Tanaduke Wylie.
the ominous moons
preconsidered generations
way of saying, “The earth swirls down through the ominous moons of preconsidered generations!”
utterance of a supersoul.
mind like Shelley’s, and featured his ultrafree free verse and prose poetry in the Nassau Literary Magazine.
prose poetry
his ultrafree free verse
took to the Bohemian life, to their great disappointment.
their great disappointment
Tanaduke’s genius
the Bohemian life
children with whom he had regaled their expectant appreciation.
winter muses
their expectant appreciation
the Shelleyan dream-children
“noon-swirled moons
surrendered Tanaduke to the futurists, deciding that he and his flaming ties would do better there.
Amory’s suggestion
was too big or too petty for them.
easy epigrams
dispensed easy epigrams and thimblefuls of Chartreuse to groups of admirers every night.
the Nassau Lit
a miniature satire
Room,” which he persuaded Tom to print in the Nassau Lit.
the pedantic temperament
our thirsty souls
speak, Teasing our thirsty souls with the Sleek ‘yeas’ of your philosophy.
the Sleek ‘yeas
an era’s must
arising from your knees, Published, in one gigantic sneeze.
some forgotten folio
one gigantic sneeze
An Eager Ass
Asker of questions.
stand, With earnest air and fidgy hand, After this hour, telling you He sat all night and burrowed through Your book.
earnest air and fidgy hand
smile and smirk, And leer, and hasten back to work. ’
learned (Through various comment on the side Which you had scrawled) that I defied The highest rules of criticism For cheap and careless witticism.
cheap and careless witticism
Plays havoc with your best percent.
hold a chair, And some defunct, moth-eaten star Enchants the mental prig you are.
the mental prig
some defunct, moth-eaten star
The atheistic orthodox
tolerance of yours, That broad and beaming view of truth (Including Kant and General Booth.)
That broad and beaming view
so from shock to shock you live, A hollow, pale affirmative.
the noisy aisle-ways
children of the blest Cheat you a word or two with feet That down the noisy aisle-ways beat.
Forget on narrow-minded earth
narrow-minded earth
The Mighty Yawn
Yawn that gave you birth.”
sailed for France to enroll in the Lafayette Esquadrille.
experience of his own to which he never succeeded in giving an appropriate value, but which, nevertheless, haunted him for three years afterward.
Amory’s envy
taxied to Bistolary’s.
were Axia Marlowe and Phoebe Column, from the Summer Garden show, Fred Sloane and Amory.
ridiculous with surplus energy, and burst into the café like Dionysian revellers.
Dionysian revellers
four in the middle of the floor,” yelled Phoebe.
tell ’em we’re here!”
the muddled crowd
sailed off in the muddled crowd.
a wicked calf
acquaintances of an hour, jostled behind a waiter to a table at a point of vantage; there they took seats and watched.
Margotson, from New Haven!”
cried above the uproar.
“Oh, Axia
shouted in salutation.
C’mon over to our table.”
, Findle
one o’clock
Call me up tomorrow about one o’clock!”
a nondescript man
back to the brilliant blonde whom he was endeavoring to steer around the room.
the old jitney waiter
ask me, I want a double Daiquiri.”
a double Daiquiri
refuse of Broadway, and women of two types, the higher of which was the chorus girl.
fourths of the whole business was for effect and therefore harmless, ended at the door of the café, soon enough for the five-o’clock train back to Yale or Princeton; about one-fourth continued on into the dimmer hours and gathered strange dust from strange places.
the dimmer hours
the five-o’clock train
one of the harmless kind.
the harmless kind
Amory new ones
Sloane and Phoebe Column were old friends; Axia and Amory new ones.
home of the prosaic and inevitable, was preparing to spoil for him the waning romance of Broadway.
the waning romance
a misty tragedy
played far behind the veil, and that it meant something definite he knew.
moved to Maxim’s, and two found them in Devinière’s.
those ancient, corrupt buyers
unsteady exhilaration
buyers of champagne who usually assisted their New York parties.
someone at a nearby table was looking at him.
sitting a little apart at a table by himself and watching their party intently.
a brown sack suit
smiled faintly.
Amory’s glance
rose to his feet and swayed back and forth, clinging to his chair.
found themselves on their way to the door.
suggested Phoebe.
be reasonably discreet for him to trot along in the party.
was not in a state to do his own thinking.
piling intimately into a taxicab, they drove out over the hundreds and drew up at a tall, white-stone apartment-house.
Axia’s arm
a bright moonlight
lined on both sides with just such tall, white-stone buildings, dotted with dark windows; they stretched along as far as the eye could see, flooded with a bright moonlight that gave them a calcium pallor.
a calcium pallor
just such tall, white-stone buildings
three and four room suites
full of three and four room suites.
rummaging for food.
Phoebe’s living-room
—don’t le’s rush
brandy bottle
reappeared with sandwiches, brandy bottle, siphon, and four glasses.
Sloane, who has a rare, distinguished edge.”
said Axia, coming in, “and Amory.
was a minute while temptation crept over him like a warm wind, and his imagination turned to fire, and he took the glass from Phoebe’s hand.
Phoebe’s hand
his uplifted hand
second that his decision came, he looked up and saw, ten yards from him, the man who had been in the café, and with his jump of astonishment the glass fell from his uplifted hand.
pile of pillows on the corner divan.
the corner divan
neither the dull, pasty color
a damp climate
done night shifts in a damp climate.
virile pallor
drawn him after a fashion, down to the merest details.
eyes that moved slowly from one to the other of their group, with just the shade of a questioning expression.
a tenuous strength
little jerky openings
sat lightly along the cushions and moved constantly with little jerky openings and closings.
head he realized he was afraid.
sort of wrongness that he felt rather than knew.
those terrible incongruities
blood on satin; one of those terrible incongruities that shake little things in the back of the brain.
pointed, though, like the shoes they wore in the fourteenth century, and with the little ends curling up.
the fourteenth century
half moccasin
a darkish brown
fill them to the end.
a strange goodness
Axia’s voice
out of the void with a strange goodness.
look at Amory!
Poor old Amory’s sick—old head
pointing toward the corner divan.
that purple zebra
zebra watching him!”
a purple zebra
“Ole zebra gotcha
the whole divan
fell faintly on his ear: “Thought you weren’t drinking,” remarked Axia sardonically, but her voice was good to hear; the whole divan that held the man was alive; alive like heat waves over asphalt, like wriggling worms.
Amory, dear, you aren’t going, Amory!”
halfway to the door.
Amory, stick ’th us!”
a little brandy
paled to a livid bronze.
a livid bronze
Axia’s beseeching voice
the paved hall
the sickly electric light
light of the paved hall.
came the moon, and Amory turned his back on it and walked.
insistence in their fall.
a slow dripping
just the slightest insistence
ahead of him, and soft shoes was presumably that far behind.
Amory’s shadow
clumsy stumblings
haggard seconds
bursting into a slow run with clumsy stumblings.
people left in the world or did they all live in white apartment-houses now?
followed in the moonlight?
met someone good who’d know what he meant and hear this damned scuffle.
this damned scuffle
the pale sheen
was almost beside him, and Amory thought he heard a quiet breathing.
began to run, blindly, his heart knocking heavily, his hands clinched.
old rottenness
was beyond that now; he turned off the street and darted into an alley, narrow and dark and smelling of old rottenness.
tiny glints
blackness, where the moonlight was shut away except for tiny glints and patches.
a long, sinuous blackness
sank panting into a corner by a fence, exhausted.
motion, like waves around a dock.
occurred to him that he was delirious or drunk.
reality such as material things could never give him.
everything that had ever preceded it in his life.
was like a problem whose answer he knew on paper, yet whose solution he was unable to grasp.
surface of that, now moved in a region where the feet and the fear of white walls were real, living things, things he must accept.
pulling him down, trying to get him inside a door and slam it behind him.
only footfalls
footfalls and white buildings in the moonlight, and perhaps he would be one of the footfalls.
shadow of the fence, there was somehow this fire.
the five or ten minutes
name it afterward.
intermingled through previous association.
just the pile
inherent tradition
pile on pile of inherent tradition or some wild prayer from way over the night.
knew, for the half instant that the gong tanged and hummed, that it was the face of Dick Humbird.
a low gong
sprang to his feet, realizing dimly that there was no more sound, and that he was alone in the graying alley.
the graying alley
light that showed the street at the other end.
was late morning when he woke and found the telephone beside his bed in the hotel tolling frantically, and remembered that he had left word to be called at eleven.
clothes in a pile by his bed.
ate breakfast in silence, and then sauntered out to get some air.
the bare shreds
imagery that stacked his memory the bare shreds of truth.
the chaotic imagery
gets sometimes in May, when the air on Fifth Avenue is a soft, light wine.
forcing his mind back and forth like a shrieking saw.
a shrieking saw
sickness rushed over Amory.
a sudden sickness
God’s sake
let’s go back!
looked at him in amazement.
act like a maniac last night, you’re never coming on Broadway again?”
the turbid stream
the debonair humor
classed him with the crowd, and he seemed no longer Sloane of the debonair humor and the happy personality, but only one of the evil faces that whirled along the turbid stream.
see it, you’re filthy, too!”
’s the matter with you?
Old remorse
remorse getting you?
be in a fine state if you’d gone through with our little party.”
keel over where he stood.
be at the Vanderbilt for lunch.”
Axia’s sidelong, suggestive smile
Back at the hotel he felt better, but as he walked into the barbershop, intending to get a head massage, the smell of the powders and tonics brought back Axia’s sidelong, suggestive smile, and he left hurriedly.
a sudden blackness
flowed around him like a divided river.
pitched onto the bed and rolled over on his face with a deadly fear that he was going mad.
veins on his forehead standing out, and his terror had hardened on him like plaster.
the little hot veins
the shadowy twilight
the thin crust
twilight he was leaving.
stepping into a taxi at the door.
one he knew, only a crowd of fagged-looking Philadelphians.
fagged-looking Philadelphians
article in a popular magazine.
the damp windowpane
pressed his hot forehead against the damp windowpane.
his hot forehead
shivered against the cloud of fog that drifted in over him.
the state’s alien population
towers of Princeton loomed up beside him and the yellow squares of light filtered through the blue rain.
centre of the room, pensively relighting a cigar-stub.
a cigar-stub
relieved on seeing him.
came in the cracked voice through the cigar smoke.
the cigar smoke
looked at him queerly and then sank into a chair and opened his Italian notebook.
threw his coat and hat on the floor, loosened his collar, and took a Wells novel at random from the shelf.
do I’ll read Rupert Brooke.”
clawed with their fingernails at the windowpane.
scratch of a match or the rustle of leather as they shifted in their chairs broke the stillness.
zigzag of lightning came the change.
sat bolt upright, frozen cold in his chair.
looking at him with his mouth drooping, eyes fixed.
nothing but the dark windowpane.
the dark windowpane
Tom’s voice
came Tom’s voice after a second in a still terror.
dropped into his chair again.
out of Witherspoon Hall, and the Princetonian fell against the door, and the May birds hailed the sun on last night’s rain.
shivering boys
The New Machiavelli
last night’s rain
means than night parades, certain individuals arrived who stirred it to its plethoric depths.
its plethoric depths
Princeton’s transition period
Amory’s last two years
countless others
institutions that Amory and countless others before him had questioned so long in secret.
wild freshmen
a definite type
biographical novel
type of biographical novel that Amory christened “quest” books.
use them as such weapons are usually used, to push their possessors ahead as selfishly and blindly as possible, but the heroes of the “quest” books discovered that there might be a more magnificent use for them.
basking in the high lights of class office.
a diplomatic autocrat
was distinctly through the channels of aristocracy that Burne found his way.
January of senior year did their friendship commence.
their friendship commence
a vague drifting acquaintance
that triumphant air
late one drizzly evening
a successful conversational bout
coming in late one drizzly evening with that triumphant air he always wore after a successful conversational bout.
third of the junior class are going to resign from their clubs.”
holding a meeting tonight to see if they can find a joint means of combating it.”
get sometimes from disappointed sophomores.
disappointed sophomores
Pete’s sake
developed simultaneously in several heads.
thinks long enough about the social system.
needed a spark to bring it out.”
each one’s mind
feel up at Cap and Gown?”
same at all the clubs; I’ve been the rounds.
the corner and fire questions
get one of the radicals in the corner and fire questions at him.”
Burne’s a damn good talker
preventing it does to us that I felt futile when I argued; finally took a position that was brilliantly neutral.
thought for a while that he’d converted me.”
third of the junior class are going to resign?”
a brisk knock
knock at the door, and Burne himself came in.
“Evening, Burne
going to Renwick’s.”
this keen enthusiasm
man who gave an immediate impression of bigness and security—stubborn, that was evident, but his stubbornness wore no stolidity, and when he had talked for five minutes Amory knew that this keen enthusiasm had in it no quality of dilettantism.
differed from the admiration he had had for Humbird.
as purely a mental interest
that immediate magnetism
thought as primarily first-class, he had been attracted first by their personalities, and in Burne he missed that immediate magnetism to which he usually swore allegiance.
the great enthusiasm
the dread stupidity
dead chords
Burne’s intense earnestness
struck dead chords in his heart.
time that land was in sight.
many a frugal conversational meal
had for dissection—college, contemporary personality and the like—they had hashed and rehashed for many a frugal conversational meal.
discussed the clubs until twelve, and, in the main, they agreed with Burne.
in the two years before, but the logic of Burne’s objections to the social system dovetailed so completely with everything they had thought, that they questioned rather than argued, and envied the sanity that enabled this man to stand out so against all traditions.
Burne’s objections
was deep in other things as well.
played in the back of his mind, and he read the Masses and Lyoff Tolstoy faithfully.
’m in a muddle about a lot of things—I’ve just discovered that I’ve a mind, and I’m starting to read.”
man named Edward Carpenter.
a definite ethical force
subject of Whitman.
tremendous—like Tolstoy.
stand for somewhat the same things.”
the Kreutzer Sonata
is mostly in the original Russian as far as I’m concerned.”
man in hundreds of years,” cried Burne enthusiastically.
that shaggy old head
aglow with ideas and a sense of shock that someone else had discovered the path he might have followed.
a deep cynicism
a petty consummation
cynicism over what had crossed his path, plotted the imperfectability of man and read Shaw and Chesterton enough to keep his mind from the edges of decadence—now suddenly all his mental processes of the last year and a half seemed stale and futile—a petty consummation of himself.
a sombre background
a dreary terror
lay that incident of the spring before, that filled half his nights with a dreary terror and made him unable to pray.
such reformed rakes
thirteenth-century cathedrals
was Ralph Adams Cram, with his adulation of thirteenth-century cathedrals—a Catholicism which Amory found convenient and ready-made, without priest or sacraments or sacrifice.
the gaudy, ritualistic, paradoxical Catholicism
Burne’s enthusiasm
searched it carefully for the germs of Burne’s enthusiasm.
realler than being clever.
his brother’s personality
thought back through two years, of Burne as a hurried, nervous freshman, quite submerged in his brother’s personality.
a hurried, nervous freshman
incident of sophomore year, in which Burne had been suspected of the leading role.
driver, who had driven him from the junction.
course of the altercation the dean remarked that he “might as well buy the taxicab.”
sign which read “Property of Dean Hollister.
took two expert mechanics half a day to dissemble it into its minutest parts and remove it, which only goes to prove the rare energy of sophomore humor under efficient leadership.
two expert mechanics
sophomore humor
an intercollegiate prom-trotter
Styles, an intercollegiate prom-trotter, had failed to get her yearly invitation to the Harvard–Princeton game.
A certain Phyllis Styles
the latter’s misogyny
ruination of the latter’s misogyny.
cried Phyllis quickly.
a vapid form
unversed in the arts of Phyllis, and was sure that this was merely a vapid form of kidding.
train she was arriving by, and depressed him thoroughly.
wanted to stag that game and entertain some Harvard friends.
delegation who arrived in his room to josh him.
game she ever persuades any young innocent to take her to!”
mad about her—that’s the real trouble.”
, Burne
do against Phyllis?”
consisted largely of the phrase: “She’ll see, she’ll see!”
a ghastly sight
the lurid figures
dot like the lurid figures on college posters.
bought flaring suits with huge peg-top trousers and gigantic padded shoulders.
flaring suits
huge peg-top trousers
gigantic padded shoulders
blossomed flaming orange ties.
their celluloid collars
rakish college hats
Princeton pennants
peeping handkerchiefs in the same color motifs.
black armbands
the same color motifs
a clanking chain
led a large, angry tomcat, painted to represent a tiger.
a large, angry tomcat
a college cheer
riotous mirth
her svelte jaw dropping
name “Phyllis” to the end.
horrified pity
two varsity sports
the stifled laughter
half a hundred village urchins
idea that this was a practical joke, but thought that Burne and Fred were two varsity sports showing their girl a collegiate time.
dozens of her former devotees, can be imagined.
Phyllis’s feelings
her former devotees
talking in loud voices of their friends on the football team, until she could almost hear her acquaintances whispering: “Phyllis Styles must be awfully hard up to have to come with those two.”
energy that he was now trying to orient with progress.
looked for failed to appear.
fury of righteousness, and the clubs in helplessness turned upon Burne their finest weapon: ridicule.
a final fury
stood for (and he began to stand for more all the time) came under the lash of many tongues, until a frailer man than he would have been snowed under.
a frailer man
taken to exchanging calls several times a week.
just a rather original politician
roared with laughter.
a man’s makeup
they dipped into a subject that had interested Amory for a long time—the matter of the bearing of physical attributes on a man’s makeup.
interested Amory
biology of this, and then: “Of course health counts—a healthy man has twice the chance of being good,” he said.
believe in ‘muscular Christianity.’ ” “I do—I believe Christ had great physical vigor.”
muscular Christianity
great physical vigor
simulated virility
fad of popular preachers rising on their toes in simulated virility, bellowing that calisthenics will save the world—no, Burne, I can’t go that.”
popular preachers
something I do know—personal appearance has a lot to do with it.”
pictures of the senior council.
much of that august body, but it does represent success here in a general way.
percent of every class here are blonds, are really light—yet two-thirds of every senior council are light.
every fifteen light-haired men
is on the senior council, and of the dark-haired men it’s only one in fifty.”
the dark-haired men
The light-haired man
the preponderant number
Presidents of the United States once, and found that way over half of them were light-haired—yet think of the preponderant number of brunettes in the race.”
a light-haired man
‘languorous brunettes
accused of the dearth.”
broad chin
was all for classical features.
heavily bearded, shaggy celebrities
collection of heavily bearded, shaggy celebrities—Tolstoy, Whitman, Carpenter, and others.
the ugliest-looking crowd
look like an old man’s home.”
an old man’s home
look at Tolstoy’s eyes.”
Tolstoy’s eyes
anything you want—but ugly they certainly are.”
the spacious foreheads
ran his hand lovingly across the spacious foreheads, and piling up the pictures put them back in his desk.
one of his favorite pursuits, and one night he persuaded Amory to accompany him.
sound very appealing to me,” admitted Amory reluctantly, “but let’s go.”
luminous white blots
a brisk argument
a good gait
set off at a good gait, and for an hour swung along in a brisk argument until the lights of Princeton were luminous white blots behind them.
person with any imagination is bound to be afraid,” said Burne earnestly.
one of the things I was afraid about.
urged eagerly.
stopped at that crossroad we just passed.
dogs howling and the shadows and no human sound.
peopled the woods with everything ghastly, just like you do; don’t you?”
stray dog
makes everything all right to project yourself completely into another’s place.
another’s place
was a menace to me.
time an automobile passed and made the dark thicker when its lamps disappeared, I’d have come in.”
’re halfway through, let’s turn back.”
return he launched into a discussion of will.
one dividing line between good and evil.
a rotten life
man who led a rotten life and didn’t have a weak will.”
’re usually insane.
not, they’re weak.
thing as a strong, sane criminal.”
a strong, sane criminal
disagree with you altogether; how about the superman?”
believe in imprisonment except for the insane.”
often self-deluding
seemed to him that life and history were rife with the strong criminal, keen, but often self-deluding; in politics and business one found him and among the old statesmen and kings and generals; but Burne never agreed and their courses began to split on that point.
the old statesmen
took to reading and walking as almost his only pursuits.
sat in all of them with a rather pathetically intent look in his eyes, as if waiting for something the lecturer would never quite come to.
squirm in his seat; and his face would light up; he was on fire to debate a point.
nothing of the sort, and once when Burne passed him four feet off, absolutely unseeingly, his mind a thousand miles away, Amory almost choked with the romantic joy of watching him.
heights where others would be forever unable to get a foothold.
declared to Tom, “he’s the first contemporary I’ve ever met whom I’ll admit is my superior in mental capacity.”
time to admit it—people are beginning to think he’s odd.”
’s way over their heads—you know you think so yourself when you talk to him—Good Lord, Tom, you used to stand out against ‘people.’
anybody you’ve ever seen.
the Philadelphian Society
faith in that rot.
wrongs of the world; moreover, he takes a drink whenever he feels like it.”
conception of him.”
sentiment toward Burne had changed on the campus.
said to Tom one night when they had grown more amicable on the subject, “that the people who violently disapprove of Burne’s radicalism are distinctly the Pharisee class—I mean they’re the best-educated men in college—the editors of the papers, like yourself and Ferrenby, the younger professors.
the Pharisee class
the best-educated men
Burne’s radicalism
The illiterate athletes
Good old Burne
some queer ideas
athletes like Langueduc think he’s getting eccentric, but they just say, ‘Good old Burne has got some queer ideas in his head,’ and pass on—the Pharisee class—Gee!
McCosh walk
hurrying along McCosh walk after a recitation.
, Tsar
waved a copy of the morning’s Princetonian at Amory.
the morning’s Princetonian
the ensuing conversation
was several days before Amory heard an account of the ensuing conversation.
the editor’s sanctum
sanctum displaying the paper cheerfully.
boy—didn’t know you stooped that low.”
get after you if you pull this irreligious stuff?”
this irreligious stuff
was on the coaching system.”
“What quotation
only coarse distinctions
capable of only coarse distinctions and puerile generalities.’ ”
puerile generalities
said it, for Pete’s sake?”
collapsed backward into the wastebasket.
stick-of-candy glamour might penetrate his disposition.
a new shining green autobus
a stock-company revival
play whose name was faintly familiar.
watched casually as a girl entered.
chord of memory.
a faint chord
such a poor little fool
a very soft, vibrant voice
voice: “Oh, I’m such a poor little fool; do tell me when I do wrong.”
memory of Isabelle.
a faint ripple
Our unfermented souls
Here in the figured dark I watch once more, There, with the curtain, roll the years away; Two years of years—there was an idle day Of ours, when happy endings didn’t bore Our unfermented souls; I could adore Your eager face beside me, wide-eyed, gay, Smiling a repertoire while the poor play Reached me as a faint ripple reaches shore.
scene which, somehow, did have charms; You wept a bit, and I grew sad for you Right here!
fainting in his arms.”
getting home at night?” demanded Amory, interested.
length of a broom-handle.
ponderous reverence
a broom-handle
closed into your study and turn on the lights—next, approaching the closet, carefully run the stick in the door three or four times.
run the stick in viciously first—never look first!”
for behind all doors—” “And the bed,” Amory suggested.
Amory, no!” cried Alec in horror.
different tactics
ghost in the room and that’s only about a third of the time, it is almost always under the bed.”
once in bed, you’re safe; he may lie around under the bed all night, but you’re safe as daylight.
a sudden leap
All that’s very interesting, Tom.”
a few new feathers
going forward in a direct, determined line had come back; youth was stirring and shaking out a few new feathers.
all this ‘distracted’ stuff
act Burne, the mystic, to me.”
, Amory
read yourself into a rhapsody with—let’s see the book.”
Life of St. Teresa,” read Alec aloud.
telling people guilelessly that I think I’m a genius, let me do it.”
laughing, “if that’s what you mean.”
amazement of the supercilious Cottage Club.
the supercilious Cottage Club
the most eccentric characters
the cynical amazement
went several times to spend weekends with Monsignor; once he took Burne, with great success, for he took equal pride and delight in displaying them to each other.
a Mrs. Lawrence
Rome-haunting American
Lawrence, a type of Rome-haunting American whom Amory liked immediately.
your third cousin
an interesting P.S.
’s rather a remarkable woman, and just about your age.”
ripply golden hair
good enough for Clara, Clara of ripply golden hair, but then no man was.
apart from the dull literature of female virtue.
the prosy morals
the dull literature
a latent strength
thought her steely blue eyes held only happiness; a latent strength, a realism, was brought to its fullest development by the facts that she was compelled to face.
her steely blue eyes
was alone in the world, with two small children, little money, and, worst of all, a host of friends.
knew she had not a servant in the house except the little colored girl guarding the babies overhead.
not a servant
girls’ boarding-schools
the greatest libertines
fascinating and almost brilliant conversation
air that ever floated through a drawing-room.
Amory’s sense
appealed to Amory’s sense of situation.
921 Ark Street
a miserable lane
lane of hovels.
disappointed when it proved to be nothing of the sort.
been in her husband’s family for years.
her husband’s family
ten years’ taxes
An elderly aunt
struggle with the heating-problem as best she could.
woman with a hungry baby at her breast and a sad Amelia-like look greeted him.
thought from his reception that she had not a care in the world.
a dreamy humor
her level-headedness
A calm virility
marked contrasts to her level-headedness—into these moods she slipped sometimes as a refuge.
a formless cloud
the most prosy things
Deepest of all in her personality was the golden radiance that she diffused around her.
the golden radiance
quaint and meditative charm
delightful originality
her prosy old uncle
the stray telegraph boy
uncle a man of quaint and meditative charm, metamorphosed the stray telegraph boy into a Puck-like creature of delightful originality.
a Puck-like creature
irritated Amory.
other adorers
read new interests into him for the benefit of what other adorers were present.
his own uniqueness
a polite but insistent stage-manager
attempting to make him give a new interpretation of a part he had conned for years.
a slender tale
tale of a hatpin and an inebriated man and herself.
an inebriated man
smiles many of them had smiled for long; there were few tears in Clara, but people smiled misty-eyed at her.
gone, and they would have bread and jam and tea late in the afternoon or “maple-sugar lunches,” as she called them, at night.
centre of the dining-room table one six o’clock.
napkins in the sideboard.
One of those people who have no interest in anything but their children.”
Tell that to somebody else,” scoffed Amory.
thing that he knew might embarrass her.
told Amory much about herself that evening.
stopped sharply with her leisure.
a tattered gray book
found a tattered gray book out of which fell a yellow sheet that he impudently opened.
a gray convent wall
written at school about a gray convent wall on a gray day, and a girl with her cloak blown by the wind sitting atop of it and thinking about the many-colored world.
bored him, but this was done with so much simplicity and atmosphere, that it brought a picture of Clara to his mind, of Clara on such a cool, gray day with her keen blue eyes staring out, trying to see her tragedies come marching over the gardens outside.
so much simplicity
such a cool, gray day
such sentiment
perched above him in the air.
an absorbing play
her cool kindness
deep of her cool kindness and rest their tired minds as at an absorbing play.
turned to find something in Browning that bore on the subject.
person he ever met who could look up passages and quotations to show him in the middle of the conversation, and yet not be irritating to distraction.
such a serious enthusiasm
enthusiasm that he grew fond of watching her golden hair bent over a book, brow wrinkled ever so little at hunting her sentence.
word from her would have given him another delicious half-hour of adoration.
fell gradually in love and began to speculate wildly on marriage.
knew afterward that the desire had not been deeply rooted.
been a silly, flaxen Clara, with the gold gone out of her hair and platitudes falling insipidly from her changeling tongue.
a silly, flaxen Clara
her changeling tongue
people who ever interested him.
goodness such an asset.
included them as being among the saved).
artificial geniality
the ever-present prig
her molten, beaten hair
her gray and velvet dress
Fills the air from her to him With light and languor and little sighs, Just so subtly he scarcely knows.
little sighs
mock distress Flushes
spontaneous in each of us—or were originally.”
has to go through a lot more, and I’ve been sheltered.”
n’t you?”
adore to.”
people who notice its preponderance.”
tremendous vanity
humble at heart.
sink to the third hell of depression when you think you’ve been slighted.
judge a man while he’s talking.
atrocious faults
the occasional philistine
attributed all sorts of atrocious faults to yourself and are trying to live up to them.
saying that you are a slave to highballs.”
character, that you’ve no will.”
most of my desires—” “You are not!”
a bound helpless slave
slave, a bound helpless slave to one thing in the world, your imagination.”
stay over an extra day from college you go about it in a sure way.
merits of going or staying are fairly clear in your mind.
shinny on the side of your desires for a few hours, and then you decide.
thinks up a million reasons why you should stay, so your decision when it comes isn’t true.
shinny on the wrong side?”
judgment—the judgment to decide at once when you know your imagination will play you false, given half a chance.”
a crazy, useless word
exclaimed Amory in surprise, “that’s the last thing I expected.”
changing the books once a week.
walked off to prison with the unconfinable imp, imagination, dancing in mocking glee beside him.
the unconfinable imp, imagination
asked without dictating the answer himself—except, perhaps, in his talks with Monsignor Darcy.
a rare, epicurean dream
Shopping with her was a rare, epicurean dream.
whispered about as the beautiful Mrs. Page.
the beautiful Mrs. Page
ain’t lookin’ for no advice.”
moves forward, smirking.
Gee! girls
gave her discounts, sometimes to her knowledge and sometimes without it.
waited upon by the head floorwalker at the very least.
the head floorwalker
go to church together on Sunday and he would walk beside her and revel in her cheeks moist from the soft water in the new air.
the stained-glass light
drew down to herself when she knelt and bent her golden hair into the stained-glass light.
fiery red
paused in his sermon and Clara and Amory turned to fiery red.
the March twilight
looked at him with such a startled face that he asked her the matter.
such a startled face
said that to me before, and it frightens me.”
love to you is—” he began.
almost the realization
touch her dress with almost the realization that Joseph must have had of Mary’s eternal significance.
Mary’s eternal significance
greatness that I’ve got is.
any latent greatness
position to marry you—” She shook her head.
a clever man
all clever men
more than any—but you know me well enough to know that I’d never marry a clever man—” She broke off suddenly.
’re not in love with me.
speaking aloud.
go—running through your catalogue of emotions in five seconds.”
the fading dusk
’re not a lightweight, of all things,” she said intently, taking his arm and opening wide her eyes—he could see their kindliness in the fading dusk.
an eternal nay
spring in the air—there’s so much lazy sweetness in your heart.”
so much lazy sweetness
pale-blue twilight
gone wild with pale-blue twilight.
flare of the corner lamppost.
the corner lamppost
bent your soul a little the other way!”
That little outburst
person of your own self-reputed brains be so constantly wrong about me?
your own self-reputed brains
look like what pleased some soppy old Greek sculptor, but I assure you that if it weren’t for my face I’d be a quiet nun in the convent without”—then
a quiet nun
some soppy old Greek sculptor
broke into a run and her raised voice floated back to him as he followed—“my precious babies, which I must go back and see.”
understand how another man might be preferred.
wives whom he had known as debutantes, and looking intently at them imagined that he found something in their faces which said: “Oh, if I could only have gotten you!”
Oh, the enormous conceit
conceit of the man!
Clara’s bright soul
gleamed on the ways they had trod.
chanted to the little pools of water.
golden frets
mandolins, golden frets of golden violins, fair, oh, wearily fair.
golden mandolins
braided basket
Skeins from braided basket, mortals may not hold; oh, what young extravagant God, who would know or ask it?.
what young extravagant God
echoed as platoon after platoon swept over the floor and shuffled out the basketball markings.
repulsion in the Pullman car coming back, for the berths across from him were occupied by stinking aliens—Greeks, he guessed, or Russians.
the Pullman car
stinking aliens
how much easier patriotism
a homogeneous race
fought, or as the Confederacy fought.
listened to the aliens guffaw and snore while they filled the car with the heavy scent of latest America.
the heavy scent
bantered in public and told themselves privately that their deaths at least would be heroic.
the obscure branches
the lounge-lizards
a soft berth
permit the English-cut uniform for officers; a few of the hopelessly lazy wrote to the obscure branches of the War Department, seeking an easy commission and a soft berth.
saw Burne and knew at once that argument would be futile—Burne had come out as a pacifist.
his own intense longing
a great smattering
The socialist magazines
preach peace as a subjective ideal.
been disorganized in—” “I know,” Amory interrupted, “I’ve heard it all.
talk propaganda with you.
’re hundreds of years before the time when nonresistance can touch us as a reality.”
ask you to think of your family or friends, because I know they don’t count a picayune with you beside your sense of duty—but, Burne, how do you know that the magazines you read and the societies you join and these idealists you meet aren’t just plain German?”
lot of weak ones—with German-Jewish names.”
my most innermost conviction
taking this stand because of propaganda I’ve heard, I don’t know; naturally I think that it’s my most innermost conviction—it seems a path spread before me just now.”
Amory’s heart
cheapness of it—no one’s really going to martyr you for being a pacifist—it’s just going to throw you in with the worst—” “I doubt it,” he interrupted.
it all smells of Bohemian New York to me.”
listen—with all God’s given you.”
Stephen’s death
word of Christ all over the world.”
just a pawn
the huge spectre
stands the huge spectre of man as he is and always will be.
stands right beside the one logical necessity of Tolstoy’s, and the other logical necessity of Nietzsche’s—” Amory broke off suddenly.
a great resemblance
Kerry’s when he had said goodbye under Blair Arch two years before.
the primal honesty
go into anything with the primal honesty of those two.
just an unconscious pawn
anarchistic publishers
haunts me—just leaving everything worth while—” Burne left in a quietly dramatic manner a week later.
a quietly dramatic manner
a battered old bicycle
intended to ride to his home in Pennsylvania.
was not in a mood for that, and as he saw Burne’s long legs propel his ridiculous bicycle out of sight beyond Alexander Hall, he knew he was going to have a bad week.
Burne’s long legs
his ridiculous bicycle
tremendous licentious force
stood for everything repugnant to him; for materialism and the direction of tremendous licentious force; it was just that Burne’s face stayed in his memory and he was sick of the hysteria he was beginning to hear.
Burne’s face
running down Goethe,” he declared to Alec and Tom.
books to prove he started the war—or that that stupid, overestimated Schiller is a demon in disguise?”
anything of theirs?” asked Tom shrewdly.
shelf in the library—to bore anyone that wants to read him!”
thing for me—” “I feel as Amory does,” said Tom.
a piston-rod
know a horsepower from a piston-rod.”
ancestors of his generation.
Amory’s dissatisfaction
cheered for Germany in 1870.
All the materialists
idolizers of German science and efficiency.
all the idolizers
“Locksley Hall
stood for—for he took him as a representative of the Victorians.
go to reap—” scribbled Amory in his notebook.
the bitter harvest
something about Tennyson’s solidity and fifty heads were bent to take notes.
Tennyson’s solidity
turned over to a fresh page and began scrawling again.
shuddered when they found what Mr. Darwin was about, They shuddered when the waltz came in and Newman hurried out—” But the waltz came in much earlier; he crossed that out.
Song in the Time of Order,’ ” came the professor’s voice, droning far away.
the professor’s voice
Time of Order”—Good Lord!
sitting on the lid smiling serenely.
Browning in his Italian villa crying bravely: “All’s for the best.”
your ‘glorious gains’—reproached him
bent to hear you pray, You thanked him for your ‘glorious gains’—reproached him for ‘Cathay.’ ”
get more than a couplet at a time?
keep Him straight with science, though He had gone wrong before.”
met your children in your home—‘I’ve fixed it up!’
years of Europe, and then virtuously—died.”
Tennyson’s idea
was to a great extent Tennyson’s idea,” came the lecturer’s voice.
the lecturer’s voice
Time of Order’ might well have been Tennyson’s title.
Swinburne’s ‘Song
Tennyson’s title
order against chaos, against waste.”
last Amory
minutes that was left of the hour.
page torn out of his notebook.
poem to the Victorians, sir,” he said coldly.
backed rapidly through the door.
end of riddles, We were the end of time.
the prison warder
sky that we might reach, Guns and a guarded border, Gantlets—but not to fling, Thousands of old emotions And a platitude for each, Songs in the time of order —And tongues, that we might sing.”
old emotions
the club veranda
haze of long evenings on the club veranda with the graphophone playing “Poor Butterfly” inside.
was the last spring under the old regime.
protest against the superman,” said Amory.
irreconcilable with any Utopia.
all the latent evil
long as he occurs, there’s trouble and all the latent evil that makes a crowd list and sway when he talks.”
a gifted man
thing to contemplate is this—it’s all happened before, how soon will it happen again?
hero to English school children as Wellington.
look on evil as evil, whether it’s clothed in filth or monotony or magnificence.”
raked the universe over the coals for four years?”
night came that was to be the last.
faces of the men they knew.
the shadowy walks
watched the moon rise, to make silver of the slate roof of Dodd and blue the rustling trees.
the slate roof
the rustling trees
sense of all the gorgeous youth that has rioted through here in two hundred years.”
flooded up from Blair Arch—broken voices for some long parting.
some long parting
’re just one generation—we’re breaking all the links that seemed to bind us here to top-booted and high-stocked generations.
Burr and Light-Horse Harry Lee
walked arm and arm with Burr and Light-Horse Harry Lee through half these deep-blue nights.”
bit of color would spoil them, make them exotic.
promise of dawn, and blue light on the slate roofs—it hurts.
the slate roofs
deserted Nassau Hall
called toward deserted Nassau Hall, “you and I knew strange corners of life.”
echoed in the stillness.
voices of freshman year surged around them and then they looked at each other with faint tears in their eyes.
faint tears
Ah, Messalina
something of this to keep, the essence of an hour.
the long corridors
a plaintive band
wait the twilight of the moon in this sequestered vale of star and spire, for one eternal morning of desire passes to time and earthy afternoon.
earthy afternoon
this sequestered vale
shadowed among the embers, furled in flame, the splendor and the sadness of the world.
letter dated January, 1918, written by Monsignor Darcy to Amory, who is a second lieutenant in the 171st Infantry, Port of Embarkation, Camp Mills, Long Island.
the 171st Infantry
a second lieutenant
a restive memory
falls plump!
the last silly curtain
the colossal stupidity
write you if only to shriek the colossal stupidity of people.
the spluttering magic-lantern show
meet as we have met, because your generation is growing hard, much harder than mine ever grew, nourished as they were on the stuff of the nineties.
quite the Amory Blaine
that hopeless resignation
this bitter age
the divine irony
ages back in that hopeless resignation.
Roman legionaries
times when I think of the men out there as Roman legionaries, miles from their corrupt city, stemming back the hordes.
their corrupt city
the corrupt city
hordes a little more menacing, after all, than the corrupt city.
bleated triumphantly all through the Victorian era.
And afterward an out-and-out materialistic world
a continual referendum
recall to your ambitions.
came to, had no recollection of it.
the paternal instinct
our deep resemblance
some common ancestor
have in common is that of the O’Donahues.
arrived at the port of embarkation when I got my papers to start for Rome, and I am waiting every moment to be told where to take ship.
went to school and college, because it was the thing to do.
leave the blustering and tremulo-heroism to the middle classes; they do it so much better.
the blustering and tremulo-heroism
remember that weekend last March when you brought Burne Holiday from Princeton to see me?
be so deceived?
a frightful shock
things—we’re extraordinary, we’re clever, we could be said, I suppose, to be brilliant.
Celtic subtleties
lose our Celtic souls in Celtic subtleties, we can almost always have our own way; but splendid—rather not!
a wonderful dossier
no small stir
going to Rome with a wonderful dossier and letters of introduction that cover every capital in Europe, and there will be “no small stir” when I get there.
not at all the sort
a middle-aged clergyman
sounds like a rather cynical paragraph, not at all the sort of thing that a middle-aged clergyman should write to a youth about to depart for the war; the only excuse is that the middle-aged clergyman is talking to himself.
a rather cynical paragraph
the middle-aged clergyman
honesty that all our sophistry cannot destroy and, above all, a childlike simplicity that keeps us from ever being really malicious.
all our sophistry
a terrible honesty
a childlike simplicity
Lament for a Foster Son, and He Going to the War Against the King of Foreign.
youth like Angus Oge Angus of the bright birds And his mind strong and subtle like the mind of Cuchulin on Muirtheme.
cheeks like the cherries of the tree
seas of Erin.
mists of rain.
great deeds
the joyful and red battle
doing great deeds of valor His life to go from him It is the chords of my own soul would be loosed.
life of his sons only.
A Vich Deelish
Son of God be above him and beneath him, before him and behind him May the King of the elements cast a mist over the eyes of the King of Foreign, May the Queen of the Graces lead him by the hand the way he can go through the midst of his enemies and they not seeing him May Patrick of the Gael and Collumb of the Churches and the five thousand Saints of Erin be better than a shield to him
Amory—Amory—I feel, somehow, that this is all; one or both of us is not going to last out this war.
reincarnation of myself in you has meant in the last few years.
moved forward on the deck until he found a stool under an electric light.
searched in his pocket for notebook and pencil and then began to write, slowly, laboriously: “We leave tonight.
filled the still, deserted street, A column of dim gray, And ghosts rose startled at the muffled beat Along the moonless way; The shadowy shipyards echoed to the feet That turned from night and day.
the moonless way
the still, deserted street
the muffled beat
The shadowy shipyards
poor gray-ribbed wrecks
the spectre shore Shades
linger on the windless decks, See on the spectre shore Shades of a thousand days, poor gray-ribbed wrecks.
the windless decks
Those futile years
gravelled light
churning of the waves about the stern Rises to one voluminous nocturne, We leave tonight.”
one voluminous nocturne
letter from Amory, headed “Brest, March 11th, 1919,” to Lieutenant T. P. D’Invilliers, Camp Gordon, Ga.
Lieutenant T. P. D’Invilliers
a very sporty apartment
30th of this very mo.; we then proceed to take a very sporty apartment, you and I and Alec, who is at me elbow as I write.
going into politics.
a vague dream
fat-paunched bundles
the young Englishmen
men in politics, but we, we are brought up to pile up a million and “show what we are made of.”
have a little money, but very darn little.
burst of religiosity toward the end, she left half of what remained to be spent in stained-glass windows and seminary endowments.
stained-glass windows
seminary endowments
are mostly in street railways and that the said Street R.R.s are losing money because of the five-cent fares.
the said Street R.R.s
man that can’t read and write!—yet
’s me all over, Mabel.
have really knockout rooms—you can get a job on some fashion magazine, and Alec can go into the Zinc Company or whatever it is that his people own—he’s looking over my shoulder and he says it’s a brass company, but I don’t think it matters much, do you?
really knockout rooms
corruption in zinc-made money as brass-made money.
the well-known Amory
write immortal literature if he were sure enough about anything to risk telling anyone else about it.
immortal literature
gift to posterity than a few cleverly turned platitudes.
the sporty churches
tall golden candlesticks
are rather burgeois, as Beatrice used to say, still you need only go to the sporty churches, and I’ll introduce you to Monsignor Darcy who really is a wonder.
those violent intrigues
Kerry’s death
Jesse’s to a certain extent.
what queer corner
curiosity to know what queer corner of the world has swallowed Burne.
a great curiosity
’s in prison under some false name?
war instead of making me orthodox, which is the correct reaction, has made me a passionate agnostic.
sick of Chesterton.
soldier who passed through the much-advertised spiritual crisis, like this fellow, Donald Hankey, and the one I knew was already studying for the ministry, so he was ripe for it.
sentimental comfort
seemed to give sentimental comfort to those at home; and may make fathers and mothers appreciate their children.
This crisis-inspired religion
a contemplative, emotionless life
a Jap butler
decide to use machine-guns with the property owners—or throw bombs with the Bolshevik.
falling in love and growing domestic.
is now for rent but when I land I’m going West to see Mr. Barton and get some details.
care of the Blackstone, Chicago.
S’ever, dear Boswell, Samuel Johnson
pageantry and carnival of rich dusk and dim streets.
rich dusk
his—the pageantry
the sensuous vibrant walks
stepped into the sensuous vibrant walks of life.
fading harmonies
eager feet
night of streets and singing—he moved in a half-dream through the crowd as if expecting to meet Rosalind hurrying toward him with eager feet from every corner.
the unforgettable faces
blend to her, the myriad footsteps, a thousand overtures, would blend to her footsteps; and there would be more drunkenness than wine in the softness of her eyes on his.
more drunkenness
a thousand overtures
the myriad footsteps
faint violins
violins drifting like summer sounds upon the summer air.
the faint glow
glow of Tom’s cigarette where he lounged by the open window.
Tom’s cigarette
shut behind him, Amory stood a moment with his back against it.
“Hello, Benvenuto Blaine
sprawled on a couch.
loathed it as usual!”
the bustling agency
vision of the bustling agency was displaced quickly by another picture.
The momentary vision
came from the window—quite a resigned sigh.
quiver of a tear on his eyelid.
“Oh, golly
do,” she whispered.
nestle inside them.
said softly, “like summer, just when I needed you most.
moved lazily over her face.
ready for me I’ll marry you.”
reproach yourself for what you can’t give me.
love you, Amory, with all my heart.”
life—Oh, Amory—” “What?”
—Oh, Amory
laugh at me, Amory.
looked at him dreamily.
scent of roses and then the death of roses—” “Beauty means the agony of sacrifice and the end of agony.”
regret all the other kisses; now I know how much a kiss can mean.”
tell her about his day at the office—and where they might live.
Rosalind—all Rosalinds—as he had never in the world loved anyone else.
Intangibly fleeting, unrememberable hours
meeting by accident downtown took lunch together, and Amory heard a story that delighted him.
began by telling Amory that he was sure Rosalind was slightly eccentric.
a talkative mood
up in Westchester County, and someone mentioned that Annette Kellerman had been there one day on a visit and had dived from the top of a rickety, thirty-foot summer house.
a rickety, thirty-foot summer house
climb up with her to see what it looked like.
spread in a beautiful swan dive, had sailed through the air into the clear water.
a beautiful swan dive
nerve to ask me why I stooped over when I dove.
smiling delightedly all through lunch.
these hollow optimists
one of these hollow optimists.
Maxfield Parrish’s jovial, colorful Old King Cole
 The Knickerbocker Bar
beamed upon by Maxfield Parrish’s jovial, colorful Old King Cole, was well crowded.
wanted particularly to know the time, for something in his mind that catalogued and classified liked to chip things off cleanly.
satisfy him in a vague way to be able to think “that thing ended at exactly twenty minutes after eight on Thursday, June 10, 1919.”
had afterward not the faintest recollection.
not the faintest recollection
a merciful coma
was in rather grotesque condition: two days of worry and nervousness, of sleepless nights, of untouched meals, culminating in the emotional crisis and Rosalind’s abrupt decision—the strain of it had drugged the foreground of his mind into a merciful coma.
untouched meals
sleepless nights
rather grotesque condition
approached and spoke to him, and the olives dropped from his nervous hands.
“Well, Amory
known at Princeton; he had no idea of the name.
Name’s Jim Wilson
nodded, his eyes staring oddly.
slapped him on the back.
eyed him dumbly until Wilson grew embarrassed under the scrutiny.
ten o’clock
displaced by Carling, class of ’15.
layer upon layer of soft satisfaction setting over the bruised spots of his spirit, was discoursing volubly on the war.
the bruised spots
insisted with owl-like wisdom.
owl-like wisdom
inalleshual vacuity
physcal anmal
shook his fist expressively at Old King Cole, “got be Prussian ’bout ev’thing, women ’specially.
Los’ idealism
straight ’bout women college.
Now don’givadam
sweeping a seltzer bottle with a broad gesture to noisy extinction on the floor, but this did not interrupt his speech.
a seltzer bottle
a broad gesture
noisy extinction
find it for tomorrow die. ’
philos’phy for me now on.”
att’tude on life.
fif’y-fif’y att’tude
Now don’ wonder, don’ wonder
emphatic in impressing on Carling the fact that he didn’t wonder that he lost the thread of his discourse and concluded by announcing to the bar at large that he was a “physcal anmal.”
a “physcal anmal
“Cel’brating blowmylife
a bromo-seltzer
remark to the bartender: “Give him a bromo-seltzer.”
far as the row of bottles behind the bar.
settled his coat with an attempt at nonchalance, but letting go of the bar was too much for him, and he slumped against a chair.
suggested Carling, offering an elbow.
get his legs in motion enough to propel him across Forty-second Street.
desire to crush people under his heel.
devouring each as though it were no larger than a chocolate-drop.
had a hazy, listless sense of people in dress suits, probably waiters, gathering around the table.
probably waiters
a hazy, listless sense
was in a room and Carling was saying something about a knot in his shoelace.
Sleep in ’em.”
surroundings, evidently a bedroom and bath in a good hotel.
evidently a bedroom
blurring and melting before his eyes, but beyond the desire to laugh he had no entirely conscious reaction.
lay for a moment and wondered idly whether they’d send up a bottle or just two of those little glass containers.
two rye highballs
out of bed and ambled into the bathroom.
found the bar boy with the drinks and had a sudden desire to kid him.
decided that this would be undignified, so he waved him away.
tumbled into his stomach and warmed him, the isolated pictures began slowly to form a cinema reel of the day before.
tears against his cheek.
Amory—don’t ever forget me—” “Hell!”
a shaken spasm
collapsed on the bed in a shaken spasm of grief.
“Damned fool
a voluminous sigh
phrased to himself emotions that would make him react even more strongly to sorrow.
the vanished spring
buried in the pillow.
lay exhausted while he realized slowly that he had been very drunk the night before, and that his head was spinning again wildly.
crossed again to Lethe.
the Biltmore bar
crowd in the Biltmore bar, and the riot began again.
several temperaments
his Majesty’s Foot
an alcoholic dressing
almost five o’clock
slept in a big, soft chair until almost five o’clock when another crowd found and woke him; there followed an alcoholic dressing of several temperaments for the ordeal of dinner.
Clair de Lune
a vague recollection
two monotonous voices
play that had a four-drink programme—a play with two monotonous voices, with turbid, gloomy scenes, and lighting effects that were hard to follow when his eyes behaved so amazingly.
turbid, gloomy scenes
Then the Coconut Grove
slept again on a little balcony outside.
a little balcony
grew quite lucid and garrulous.
share of the expense and insisted in a loud voice on arranging everything then and there to the amusement of the tables around him.
was at the next table, so Amory rose and, approaching gallantly, introduced himself.
a famous cabaret star
involved him in an argument, first with her escort and then with the headwaiter—Amory’s attitude being a lofty and exaggerated courtesy.
a lofty and exaggerated courtesy
Amory’s attitude
back to his own table.
irrefutable logic
take a room at the Commodore, get into a hot bath and open a vein.”
rye, old boy!”
dissuaded, from argument at least.
This provoked discussion
one’s health
was when one’s health was bad that one felt that way most.
a most delicate, scarcely noticeable sleeping position
went into a deep stupor.
a deep stupor
woman, with brown, disarranged hair and dark blue eyes.
brown, disarranged hair
said Amory, blinking.
man in the background and that one of his party was arguing with him.
a noisy man
was with’s a damn fool,” confided the blue-eyed woman.
queried Amory with intense wisdom.
Go home with him,” he advised gravely.
the noisy man
away from his detainers and approached.
regarded him coldly, while the girl clung to him closer.
spoke in Amory’s ear.
Amory’s ear
take care of her, then!” shouted Amory furiously.
no W.Y.C.A. worker
I?—am I
crowd around the table thickened.
instant a brawl threatened, but a sleek waiter bent back Margaret Diamond’s fingers until she released her hold on Amory, whereupon she slapped the waiter furiously in the face and flung her arms about her raging original escort.
a sleek waiter
Margaret Diamond’s fingers
getting scarce!”
“Check, waiter
door at Bascome and Barlow’s advertising agency.
Barlow’s advertising agency
the president’s door
“Morning, Mr. Barlow
set his mouth slightly ajar that he might better listen.
“Well, Mr. Blaine
tired of it,” interrupted Amory rudely.
anyone else’s.
Harebell’s flour
tired of telling people about it—
Mr. Barlow’s face
ingots of expression.
several ingots
asked for a position—” Amory waved him to silence.
a good carpenter
less than a good carpenter.”
took about ten thousand dollars to educate me where I could write your darned stuff for you.
your darned stuff
got stenographers here you’ve paid fifteen a week for five years.”
argue with you, sir,” said Mr. Barlow rising.
looking at each other impassively and then Amory turned and left the office.
Lord, Amory, where’d you get the black eye—and the jaw?”
a low whistle
couple of sailors and a few stray pedestrians, I guess.
a few stray pedestrians
fall down after a while and everybody sort of slashes in at you before you hit the ground—then they kick you.”
chasing you all over town, Amory.
tumbled into a chair and asked for a cigarette.
go home and live, so he—” A spasm of pain shook Amory.
get someone else if we’re going to stay here.
thing that met his glance was a photograph of Rosalind that he had intended to have framed, propped up against a mirror on his dresser.
looked at it unmoved.
was curiously unreal.
the vivid mental pictures
a cardboard box
one in Alec’s room.”
Alec’s room
returning to his dresser, opened a drawer full of letters, notes, part of a chain, two little handkerchiefs, and some snapshots.
two little handkerchiefs
cake of his lost love’s soap, finally washed his hands with it.
his lost love’s soap
hum “After you’ve gone”.
undertone of anxiety.
disembarked at Forty-third Street and strolled to the Biltmore bar.
“Yo-ho! Waiter
Amory’s sorrows
had neither remorse for the past three weeks nor regret that their repetition was impossible.
 The advent
method to shield himself from the stabs of memory, and while it was not a course he would have prescribed for others, he found in the end that it had done its business: he was over the first flush of pain.
his unplumbed depths tenderness
flush of his youth and brought from his unplumbed depths tenderness that had surprised him, gentleness and unselfishness that he had never given to another creature.
those he went back to that, perhaps, more typical frame of mind, in which the girl became the mirror of a mood in him.
affection for Rosalind.
passionate admiration
a deep, undying affection
nightmare of his three weeks’ spree, that he was emotionally worn out.
his three weeks’ spree
the arabesque nightmare
people and surroundings that he remembered as being cool or delicately artificial, seemed to promise him a refuge.
sixty dollars
his father’s funeral
more of the same tone.
a cynical story
inspired him to no further effort.
surprised by his discovery through a critic named Mencken of several excellent American novels:
The Undying Fire
Brute, The Damnation of Theron Ware, and Jennie Gerhardt.
sunk in his appreciation from sagacious, life-saturated geniuses to merely diverting contemporaries.
sagacious, life-saturated geniuses
the elusive lock
Shaw’s aloof clarity
the gloriously intoxicated efforts
his rapt attention
efforts of H. G. Wells to fit the key of romantic symmetry into the elusive lock of truth, alone won his rapt attention.
romantic symmetry
Darcy, to whom he had written when he landed, but he had not heard from him; besides he knew that a visit to Monsignor would entail the story of Rosalind, and the thought of repeating it turned him cold with horror.
Lawrence, a very intelligent, very dignified lady, a convert to the church, and a great devotee of Monsignor’s.
a very intelligent, very dignified lady
a great devotee
take luncheon with her?
said rather ambiguously when he arrived.
plunged into Bolshevism?” asked Amory, interested.
a frightful time
went to Boston when the Irish President arrived and he was greatly distressed because the receiving committee, when they rode in an automobile, would put their arms around the President.”
impressed you more than anything while you were in the army?
, more disastrous battle
spite of himself.
extent on the physical shape a man is in.
brave as the next man—it used to worry me before.”
idea that men can stand anything if they get used to it, and the fact that I got a high mark in the psychological examination.”
more condensed New York
expelling great quantities of breath into a little space.
vaguely of Beatrice, not in temperament, but in her perfect grace and dignity.
more conservative “Union Club” families
furnishings, the manner in which dinner was served, were in immense contrast to what he had met in the great places on Long Island, where the servants were so obtrusive that they had positively to be bumped out of the way, or even in the houses of more conservative “Union Club” families.
immense contrast
Mrs. Lawrence’s New England ancestry
symmetrical restraint
air of symmetrical restraint, this grace, which he felt was continental, was distilled through Mrs. Lawrence’s New England ancestry or acquired in long residence in Italy and Spain.
the menacing phenomena
talked, with what he felt was something of his old charm, of religion and literature and the menacing phenomena of the social order.
pagan at present.
bearing on life at my age.”
poet, Stephen Vincent Benet, or the Irish Republic.
the rancid accusations
time when his own Celtic traits were pillars of his personal philosophy.
his own Celtic traits
only this revival
said Amory one day, stretching himself at ease in the comfortable window-seat.
a recumbent position
felt most natural in a recumbent position.
idea that you think would do to print.”
an ambitionless normality
back to an ambitionless normality.
fond of.
The old English hunting prints
the carved Louis XV chair
Tom’s furniture
Montespan’s wraith
orphaned candlesticks
was because one was sitting in the lap of Montespan’s wraith—at any rate, it was Tom’s furniture that decided them to stay.
decadent days
acute spinal disorders
went out very little: to an occasional play, or to dinner at the Ritz or the Princeton Club.
midwestern or New Jersey debbies
level of the women present,” as Amory had once put it to a horrified matron.
the great rendezvous
congenial spirits
the “Club de Gink
the Club-de-Vingt
a horrified matron
several alarming letters
Amory’s hands
obtainable at present would serve this year to little more than pay for the taxes and necessary improvements; in fact, the lawyer suggested that the whole property was simply a white elephant on Amory’s hands.
a vague sentimentality
day on which he announced his ennui to Tom had been quite typical.
his beloved buses
lunched with Mrs. Lawrence, and then ridden abstractedly homeward atop one of his beloved buses.
frame of mind for the young man of your age and condition?”
more than bored; I am restless.”
war itself had any great effect on either you or me—but it certainly ruined the old backgrounds, sort of killed individualism out of our generation.”
sort of killed individualism
out of the whole world.
a really great dictator
now even a Leonardo da Vinci
a real old-fashioned bolt
agree with you,” Tom interrupted.
such egotistic positions
since—oh, since the French Revolution.”
mistaking this period when every nut is an individualist for a period of individualism.
been powerful when he has represented; he’s had to compromise over and over again.
soon as Trotsky and Lenin take a definite, consistent stand they’ll become merely two-minute figures like Kerensky.
Even Foch
significance of Stonewall Jackson.
pursuit of man, and yet the popular heroes of the war had neither authority nor responsibility: Guynemer and Sergeant York.
the most individualistic pursuit
hero of Pershing?
chapter on The Hero as a Big Man.”
a good listener
believe in leaders now, pitifully hard.
Shaw, a Nietzsche, than the crosscurrents of criticism wash him away.
a popular reformer
path to obscurity.
sick of hearing the same name over and over.”
’re on The New Democracy, considered the most brilliant weekly in the country, read by the men who do things and all that.
man, doctrine, book, or policy that is assigned you to deal with.
the more spiritual scandal
money they pay you, the more the people buy the issue.
a blighted Shelley
Tom d’Invilliers
d’Invilliers, a blighted Shelley, changing, shifting, clever, unscrupulous, represent the critical consciousness of the race—Oh, don’t protest, I know the stuff.
the latest honest, conscientious effort
write book reviews in college; I considered it rare sport to refer to the latest honest, conscientious effort to propound a theory or a remedy as a ‘welcome addition to our light summer reading.’
believe in older authors, constituents try to believe in their Congressmen, countries try to believe in their statesmen, but they can’t.
too much scattered, illogical, ill-considered criticism
voices, too much scattered, illogical, ill-considered criticism.
’s worse in the case of newspapers.
hurried men
that particularly grasping, acquisitive form
predigested food
Any rich, unprogressive old party
known as financial genius can own a paper that is the intellectual meat and drink of thousands of tired, hurried men, men too involved in the business of modern living to swallow anything but predigested food.
buys his politics, prejudices, and philosophy.
more contradiction
the paper’s ownership
confusion, more contradiction, a sudden inrush of new ideas, their tempering, their distillation, the reaction against them—” He paused only to get his breath.
a sudden inrush
a vulgar liaison
people’s heads
dangerous, shallow epigrams
a poor, inoffensive capitalist
some innocent little Bolshevik
clarify or depart entirely; I have quite enough sins on my soul without putting dangerous, shallow epigrams into people’s heads; I might cause a poor, inoffensive capitalist to have a vulgar liaison with a bomb, or get some innocent little Bolshevik tangled up with a machine-gun bullet—” Tom was growing restless under this lampooning of his connection with The New Democracy.
do with your being bored?”
much to do with it.
an entirely sexless animal
led to believe that the ‘healthy American boy’ from nineteen to twenty-five is an entirely sexless animal.
matter of fact, the healthier he is the less that’s true.
alternative to letting it get you is some violent interest.
believe too much in the responsibilities of authorship to write just now; and business, well, business speaks for itself.
anything in the world that I’ve ever been interested in, except a slim, utilitarian connection with economics.
a slim, utilitarian connection
see of it, lost in a clerkship, for the next and best ten years of my life would have the intellectual content of an industrial movie.”
doing it instead of living—get thinking maybe life is waiting for me in the Japanese gardens at the Ritz or at Atlantic City or on the lower East Side.
girl in the wide world that could have held me.”
have violent views again on something.”
makes me sick at my stomach—” “Happy families try to make people feel that way,” said Tom cynically.
days when Amory listened.
indulged in the slaughter of American literature.
look at them—Edna Ferber, Gouverneur Morris, Fanny Hurst, Mary Roberts Rinehart—not producing among ’em one story or novel that will last ten years.
man Cobb—I don’t think he’s either clever or amusing—and what’s more, I don’t think very many people do, except the editors.
groggy with advertising.
oh Zane Grey
Most of them can’t write, I’ll admit.
picture of American life, but his style and perspective are barbarous.
lack of any sense of humor; but at least they crowd their work instead of spreading it thin.
write every book as if he were going to be beheaded the day he finished it.”
that double entente
literary felicity
deal of literary felicity but they just simply won’t write honestly; they’d all claim there was no public for good stuff.
depend on America for over half their sales?”
dropped his arms until they swung loosely beside the chair and emitted faint grunts.
writing a satire on ’em now, calling it Boston Bards and Hearst Reviewers.”
hear ’em, if they’re funny.”
place your names here So that you may live If only as names, Sinuous, mauve-colored names, In the Juvenalia Of my collected editions.”
mauve-colored names
“So Walter Arensberg
the iron pansy
meal on the arrogance of the last two lines.”
damnation of American novelists and poets.
American novelists
Tom’s sweeping damnation
both Vachel Lindsay
artistry of Edgar Lee Masters.
this idiotic drivel
look through the smoke—I am the life sense.’ ”
read about it, unless it’s crooked business.
crooked business
life of James J. Hill and not one of these long office tragedies that harp along on the significance of smoke—” “And gloom,” said Tom.
’s another favorite, though I’ll admit the Russians have the monopoly.
girls who break their spines and get adopted by grouchy old men because they smile so much.
grouchy old men
glancing at his wristwatch.
cheerful cripples
” “Six o’clock
the Russian peasant
strength of the Juvenalia of your collected editions.”
Amory in another surge of unrest realized that it was just five months since he and Rosalind had met.
was already hard for him to visualize the heart-whole boy who had stepped off the transport, passionately desiring the adventure of life.
a vague effort
poignancy of that time.
oil from some divine machine, in an hour of thaw and stars.
strange half-intermittent damps
borne in upon a lull.
Strange damps
taste the stuff of half-remembered dreams, sweet and new on your mouth.
ice!—one brilliant note
cracked like ice!—one brilliant note and there, radiant and pale, you stood.
short upon the roofs and the changeling city swooned.)
the changeling city
things she loved, leaving the great husk.
eerie half-laughter
the great husk
only a fatuous sigh
frosty mist
the long, mazed wires
Darcy, who had evidently just stumbled on his address: My dear Boy: Your last letter was quite enough to make me worry about you.
feeling of romance that you had before the war.
the mystical element
element in us: something flows into us that enlarges our personalities, and when it ebbs out our personalities shrink; I should call your last two letters rather shrivelled.
Beware of losing yourself in the personality of another being, man or woman.
get a moment to write, but I wish you would come up here later if only for a weekend.
be surprised to see the red hat of a cardinal descend upon my unworthy head within the next eight months.
my unworthy head
like to have a house in New York or Washington where you could drop in for weekends.
Amory, I’m very glad we’re both alive; this war could easily have been the end of a brilliant family.
marry in haste and repent at leisure, but I think you won’t.
the present calamitous state
state of your finances, what you want is naturally impossible.
say that there will be something of an emotional crisis within the next year.
greatest affection
fell precipitously to pieces.
Tom’s mother
the serious and probably chronic illness
illness of Tom’s mother.
instructions to sublet and shook hands gloomily in the Pennsylvania Station.
set off southward, intending to join Monsignor in Washington.
the luxuriant fields
fields of Maryland into Ramilly County.
for in Maryland he met Eleanor.
thought of Eleanor he seemed still to hear the wind sobbing around him and sending little chills into the places beside his heart.
little chills
lost also the power of regretting it.
mystery that held him with wild fascination and pounded his soul to flakes.
wild fascination
rode to the highest hill and watched an evil moon ride high, for they knew then that they could see the devil in each other.
the infinite sadness
mirror of himself that he found in the gorgeous clarity of her mind?
say: “And Amory will have no other adventure like me.”
more than he would sigh.
The fading things
things we only know We’ll have forgotten.
Desires that melted with the snow, And dreams begotten This today:
dawns we laughed to greet, That all could see, that none could share, Will be but dawns.
silence, When we’ve met, Will give old ghosts a waste to roam, Or stir the surface of the sea.
drift beneath the foam We shall not see.”
maintained that sea and see couldn’t possibly be used as a rhyme.
verse that she couldn’t find a beginning for: “But wisdom passes.
Back to the old—For all our tears We shall not know.”
belonged to the oldest of the old families of Ramilly County and lived in a big, gloomy house with her grandfather.
a big, gloomy house
smiling complacency
reciting “Ulalume” to the cornfields, and congratulating Poe for drinking himself to death in that atmosphere of smiling complacency.
strolled for several miles along a road that was new to him, and then through a wood on bad advice from a colored woman.
black as pitch and the rain began to splatter down through the trees, become suddenly furtive and ghostly.
his great impatience
scattered through the woods in intermittent batteries.
intermittent batteries
menacing crashes
hunting for a way out, and finally, through webs of twisted branches, caught sight of a rift in the trees where the unbroken lightning showed open country.
the unbroken lightning
edge of the woods and then hesitated whether or not to cross the fields and try to reach the shelter of the little house marked by a light far down the valley.
vivid and grotesque for great sweeps around.
great sweeps
scarcely ten steps
a low, husky voice
was a song, in a low, husky voice, a girl’s voice, and whoever was singing was very close to him.
a girl’s voice
D’une langueur Monotone
cœur D’une langueur Monotone.”
his restless mood
Des violons
went on without a quaver.
come vaguely from a haystack about twenty feet in front of him.
a weird chant
Tout suffocant Et blême
began again in a weird chant that soared and hung and fell and blended with the rain: “Tout suffocant Et blême quand Sonne l’heure Je me souviens Des jours anciens Et je pleure.”
Des jours anciens
an extemporaneous tune
a soaking haystack
deliver Verlaine in an extemporaneous tune to a soaking haystack?”
noise of the rain and the wind.
A delighted shriek
came from the haystack.
boy that likes ‘Ulalume’—I recognize your voice.”
foot of the haystack, whither he had arrived, dripping wet.
damp hair
appeared over the edge—it was so dark that Amory could just make out a patch of damp hair and two eyes that gleamed like a cat’s.
catch your hand—no, not there—on the other side.”
helped him onto the top.
she of the damp hair.
the damp hair
is dangerous without seeing my face.”
looked eagerly at her who stood beside him on the soggy haystack, ten feet above the ground.
the soggy haystack
a slender figure
half of the raincoat, which I was using as a waterproof tent until you so rudely interrupted me.”
reddish hair
got reddish hair.
Psyche, your soul.”
curtain of wind and rain.
most of them, and the rain doing for the rest.
wasn’t beautiful—supposing she was forty and pedantic—heavens!
sent a girl to amuse him just as it sent Benvenuto Cellini men to murder, and he was wondering if she was mad, just because she exactly filled his mood.
Benvenuto Cellini men
long as they knew each other Eleanor and Amory could be “on a subject” and stop talking with the definite thought of it in their heads, yet ten minutes later speak aloud and find that their minds had followed the same channels and led them each to a parallel idea, an idea that others would have found absolutely unconnected with the first.
each other Eleanor
the definite thought
know about ‘Ulalume’—how did you know the color of my hair?
overreaching light
looked for the first time into those eyes of hers.
the blinding glare
slender brows
color of marble in starlight, slender brows, and eyes that glittered green as emeralds in the blinding glare.
witch, of perhaps nineteen, he judged, alert and dreamy and with the telltale white line over her upper lip that was a weakness and a delight.
the telltale white line
gasp against the wall of hay.
them all—besides my name isn’t Madeline, it’s Eleanor.”
look like Eleanor—you have that Eleanor look.
fellow lunatic
neck, fellow lunatic,” she offered finally.
number on watch-case, 3077 W; nose, delicate aquiline; temperament, uncanny—” “And me,” Amory interrupted, “where did you see me?”
3077 W
Ramilly Savage
one of those men,” she answered haughtily, “must lug old self into conversation.
end of the path a liquescent’ (says he) ‘And nebulous lustre was born.’
a pleasant, conceited way
nebulous lustre
poked my eyes up over the hedge, but you had started to run, for some unknown reason, and so I saw but the back of your beautiful head.
man for whom many of us might sigh,’ and I continued in my best Irish—” “All right,” Amory interrupted.
those I read into men on such nights as these.
other people thrills
man I’d marry.
its ghostly surge
feel like a character in a play, the appropriate feeling in an unconventional situation—instead, he had a sense of coming home.
an unconventional situation
believe in immortality.”
a stale, sickly depression
depressing with a stale, sickly depression, nevertheless.
get wet—like a wet hen; wet hens always have great clarity of mind,” she concluded.
wet hens
a wet hen
my slicker and rubber boots
afraid of the dark, so I put on my slicker and rubber boots and came out.
am and it hasn’t, of course, but the main point is that this time I wasn’t any more afraid of it than I had been when I was a Christian Scientist, like I was last year.
“Why, you little wretch
Savage, materiologist—no jumping, no starting, come early—” “But I have to have a soul,” he objected.
leaned toward him, her burning eyes never leaving his own and whispered with a sort of romantic finality: “I thought so, Juan, I feared so—you’re sentimental.
romantic finality
’re not like me.
a romantic little materialist
the sentimental person
distinction of Amory’s.)
get off the haystack and walk to the crossroads.”
descended from their perch.
a graceful lump
arrived in a graceful lump in the soft mud where she sat for an instant, laughing at herself.
jumped to her feet and slipped her hand into his, and they tiptoed across the fields, jumping and swinging from dry spot to dry spot.
A transcendent delight
risen and the storm had scurried away into western Maryland.
Eleanor’s arm
see life through her green eyes.
came out of the fields and filled his way homeward.
the summer moths
Amory’s window
mystic revery
lay awake in the clear darkness.
blade of grass and nibbled at it scientifically.
fall in love in August or September,” he proffered.
Spring in corsets!”
“Huh! Spring
a tailored suit
Bind on thy sandals, oh, thou most fleet.
quoted Eleanor softly, and then added: “I suppose Halloween is a better day for autumn than Thanksgiving.”
the warm balmy nights
only the unfulfilled promise
place of the warm balmy nights I dream of in April.
Fourth of July,” Amory suggested facetiously.
raking him with her eyes.
pagan heaven
was one,” she said finally, “a sort of pagan heaven—you ought to be a materialist,” she continued irrelevantly.
pictures of Rupert Brooke.”
tried to play Rupert Brooke as long as he knew Eleanor.
the dead Englishman’s literary moods
reflexes of the dead Englishman’s literary moods.
ran up and down the scale from Grantchester to Waikiki.
her voice husky
something most passionate in Eleanor’s reading aloud.
seemed nearer, not only mentally, but physically, when they read, than when she was in his arms, and this was often, for they fell half into love almost from the first.
revelled in their imaginations, he knew that neither of them could care as he had cared once before—I suppose that was why they turned to Brooke, and Swinburne, and Shelley.
tiny golden tentacles
Triumph of Time, and four lines of it rang in his memory afterward on warm nights when he saw the fireflies among dusky tree trunks and heard the low drone of many frogs.
the low drone
Swinburne’s Triumph
dusky tree trunks
her throaty voice
fruitless husk
The dream foregone
things that are well outworn; Of fruitless husk and fugitive flower, The dream foregone and the deed foreborne?”
the deed foreborne
fugitive flower
a fleecy-headed drum
two: old Mr. Ramilly
granddaughter, Eleanor.
a restless mother
stay with a bachelor uncle, and there she insisted on being a debutante at the age of seventeen.
arrived in the country in March, having quarrelled frantically with all her Baltimore relatives, and shocked them into fiery protest.
fiery protest
esprit that hinted strongly of the boulevards, led many innocents still redolent of St. Timothy’s and Farmington, into paths of Bohemian naughtiness.
Bohemian naughtiness
scene, from which Eleanor emerged, subdued but rebellious and indignant, to seek haven with her grandfather who hovered in the country on the near side of senility.
a forgetful cavalier
a more hypocritical era
far as her story went; she told him the rest herself, but that was later.
floated lazily in the water he shut his mind to all thoughts except those of hazy soap-bubble lands where the sun splattered through wind-drunk trees.
hazy soap-bubble lands
loll there on the edge of time while the flower months failed.
wanted to drift and be young.
the half-sensual, half-neurotic quality
that sudden absurd instinct
instinct for paternity that Rosalind had stirred; the half-sensual, half-neurotic quality of this autumn with Eleanor.
quick, unrelated scenes
these strange cumbersome pictures
scrapbook of his life.
sat for this half-hour of his youth and tried to enjoy brilliant epicurean courses.
brilliant epicurean courses
time where all should be welded together.
borne along a stream of love or fascination, or left in an eddy, and in the eddies he had not desired to think, rather to be picked up on a wave’s top and swept along again.
a wave’s top
The despairing, dying autumn
day as they lay dripping by the water.
summer of our hearts—” he ceased.
curious elfin love moods
dim phantasmal shapes
expressing eternal beauty in curious elfin love moods.
pagoda, where there were scents so plaintive as to be nearly musical.
a vine-hung pagoda
the trellised darkness
the scarred trees
be there with Eleanor, shadowy and unreal, seemed somehow oddly familiar.
past that ever seemed strange and unbelievable.
“little lonesome voices
twisted in through the vines and listened.
stirring in the grass; not one wind stirs.
fronts the full moon and so inters the golden token in its icy mass,” chanted Eleanor to the trees that skeletoned the body of the night.
its icy mass
let’s cut through the woods and find the hidden pools.”
’s after one, and you’ll get the devil,” he objected, “and I don’t know enough about horses to put one away in the pitch dark.”
“Shut up, you old fool
patted him lazily with her riding-crop.
leave your old plug in our stable and I’ll send him over tomorrow.”
drive me to the station with this old plug at seven o’clock.”
seven o’clock
grasped her hand.
Harper’s Hill
going to ride up Harper’s Hill.
comes in our programme about five o’clock.”
about five o’clock
train like an immigrant all day tomorrow, going back to New York.”
coming along the road—let’s go!
the belated traveller
followed her all day for three weeks.
Eleanor, a graceful, facile Manfred, build herself intellectual and imaginative pyramids while she revelled in the artificialities of the temperamental teens and they wrote poetry at the dinner-table.
the temperamental teens
a graceful, facile Manfred
herself intellectual and imaginative pyramids
a hundred happy Junes
rhymed her eyes with life and death: “Through Time I’ll save my love!”
pause before his sonnet there”.
a thousandth June
were Beauty for an afternoon.
wrote one day, when he pondered how coldly we thought of the “Dark Lady of the Sonnets,” and how little we remembered her as the great man wanted her remembered.
write with such divine despair, was that the lady should live.
such divine despair
only obvious, imitative rhetoric
cared more for the poem than for the lady the sonnet would be only obvious, imitative rhetoric and no one would ever have read it after twenty years.
leaving in the morning and they had agreed to take a long farewell trot by the cold moonlight.
the cold moonlight
a long farewell trot
scarcely a word
rode for half an hour with scarcely a word, except when she whispered “Damn!”
a bothersome branch
whispered it as no other girl was ever able to whisper it.
started up Harper’s Hill, walking their tired horses.
lonesome than the woods.”
said, shuddering.
underbrush at night.
rolling moonlight down it.”
few footsteps
edge of the cliff knew few footsteps at any time.
lay the black edge of the woods like a dark frosting on white cake, and ahead the sharp, high horizon.
a dark frosting
the rock-ribbed moonlight
Only an occasional negro cabin
settled on them and drove all the warm nights from their minds.
end of summer,” said Eleanor softly.
beat of our horses’ hoofs—‘tump-tump-tump-a-tump.’
our horses’ hoofs—‘tump-tump-tump-a-tump
swear eternity was divisible into so many tumps?
so many tumps
way I feel—old horses go tump-tump.
thing that separates horses and clocks from us.
go ‘tump-tump-tump’ without going crazy.”
pulled her cape around her and shivered.
the fundamental honesty
keeps me from being absolutely wicked by making me realize my own sins.”
close by the cliff and Amory gazed over.
line, broken by tiny glints in the swift water.
“Rotten, rotten old world
the wretchedest thing
stupider than I am, not much, but some, and you can lope about and get bored and then lope somewhere else, and you can play around with girls without being involved in meshes of sentiment, and you can do anything and be justified—and here am I with the brains to do everything, yet tied to the sinking ship of future matrimony.
future matrimony
born a hundred years from now, well and good, but now what’s in store for me—I have to marry, that goes without saying.
descend to their level and let them patronize my intellect in order to get their attention.
year that I don’t marry I’ve got less chance for a first-class man.
marry into a dinner-coat.
clever men
person in fifty has any glimmer of what sex is.
one little soupçon
bit of real love in the world is ninety-nine percent passion and one little soupçon of jealousy.”
ninety-nine percent passion
force that’s part of the machinery under everything.
a rather unpleasant overpowering force
actor that lets you see his mechanics!
remnants of romantic chivalry diluted with Victorian sentiment—and we who consider ourselves the intellectuals cover it up by pretending that it’s another side of us, has nothing to do with our shining brains; we pretend that the fact that we realize it is really absolving us from being a prey to it.
romantic chivalry
Victorian sentiment
The mediocre intellects
Plato’s second class
middle of our purest abstractions, so close that it obscures vision.
our purest abstractions
leaned toward her in his saddle, but she drew away.
maxims of Confucius?”
looked up, rather taken aback.
just an old hypocrite
the sixth and ninth commandments
the degenerate Italians
gabble about the sixth and ninth commandments.
scowling priests
illiterate Irish repentant
just all cloaks
high white foreheads
worked out for the individual by the individual here in high white foreheads like mine, and you’re too much the prig to admit it.”
not even a definite abstract goodness
shook her little fists at the stars.
’s a God let him strike me—strike me!”
manner of atheists,” Amory said sharply.
Eleanor’s blasphemy
materialism, always a thin cloak, was torn to shreds by Eleanor’s blasphemy.
always a thin cloak
intellectuals who don’t find faith convenient,” he continued coldly, “like Napoleon and Oscar Wilde and the rest of your type, you’ll yell loudly for a priest on your deathbed.”
reined in beside her.
voice that scared him.
a queer voice
turned and was riding breakneck for the end of the plateau.
nerves in a vast clangor.
a vast clangor
was under a cloud and her horse would step blindly over.
edge of the cliff she gave a sudden shriek and flung herself sideways—plunged from her horse and, rolling over twice, landed in a pile of brush five feet from the edge.
a sudden shriek
a frantic whinny
went over with a frantic whinny.
was by Eleanor’s side and saw that her eyes were open.
Eleanor’s side
helped her gently to her feet and boosted her onto his saddle.
bent forward on the pommel, sobbing bitterly.
a crazy streak
went mad—stark raving crazy.
Amory’s love
waned slowly with the moon.
run into his arms, nor were they stretched to meet her as in the week before.
a bitter sadness
hating each other with a bitter sadness.
only the little sighing gusts
come in with the sun.
burden of light, Bosoming day as a laughing and radiant daughter.
a laughing and radiant daughter
whisper unheard, unafraid of the night.
the breathless air
patterns they covered the ground with Tapestries, mystical, faint in the breathless air.
by who had sought for glory, Whispered to us of peace in the plaintive breeze, Whispered of old dead faiths that the day had shattered, Youth the penny that bought delight of the moon; That was the urge that we knew and the language that mattered That was the debt that we paid to the usurer June.
the plaintive breeze
past that we need not know, What if the light is but sun and the little streams sing not, We are together, it seems.
the changing glade
home in the changing glade?
the ghostly clover
out of the dark in the ghostly clover?
stirred in your sleep.
are chronicle now to the eerie.
Close to this ununderstandable changeling that’s I. Fear is an echo we traced to Security’s daughter; Now we are faces and voices.
Security’s daughter
this ununderstandable changeling
lilt of the water.
and less, too soon, Whispering half-love
Youth the penny that bought delight of the moon.”
far away a fading laughter
 “Faint winds
song fading and leaves falling, Faint winds, and far away a fading laughter.
Faint winds
flutters there to waft her Sisters on.
down the valley through the crying trees The body of the darker storm flies; brings With its new air the breath of sunken seas And slender tenuous thunder.
slender tenuous thunder
winds that I know, and storm.
summer every rain was rare; There was a season every wind was warm.
pass me in the mist.
that wild irony
Dim as a dream and wan with all old hours (Whispers will creep into the growing dark.
that gay despair
the stemless flowers
the eerie green
Tears from her wetted breast the splattered blouse Of day, glides down the dreaming hills, tear-bright, To cover with her hair the eerie green.
the splattered blouse
Love for the dusk.
paced the board walk at day’s end, lulled by the everlasting surge of changing waves, smelling the half-mournful odor of the salt breeze.
the everlasting surge
day’s end
the salt breeze
the half-mournful odor
the faithless land
deeper than the faithless land.
raven-figured flags
Norse galleys
whisper of Norse galleys ploughing the water world under raven-figured flags, of the British dreadnoughts, gray bulwarks of civilization steaming up through the fog of one dark July into the North Sea.
gray bulwarks
the British dreadnoughts
“Well—Amory Blaine
face protruded from the driver’s seat.
the driver’s seat
a familiar cheerful face
Come on down, goopher!”
flight of wooden steps approached the car.
sorry for this; he hated to lose Alec.
some secluded nook
jolt of bourbon.”
a wee jolt
smile very handsomely at you.”
a gaudy, vermilion-lipped blonde
squeezed into the back seat beside a gaudy, vermilion-lipped blonde.
“Hello, Doug Fairbanks
Walking for exercise or hunting for company?”
going in for statistics.”
an unfrequented side street
street Alec stopped the car among deep shadows.
quart of bourbon from under the fur rug.
no definite reason
party of ours, sophomore year?”
slept in the pavilions up in Asbury Park—” “Lord, Alec!
These dreary fall days
between at the Ranier, and he’s got to go back to New York.
left the car and sauntered back along the board walk to the hotel.
further stimulation
further locomotion
a deep, lethargic gulf
desire to work or write, love or dissipate.
time in his life he rather longed for death to roll over his generation, obliterating their petty fevers and struggles and exultations.
their petty fevers
that riotous, joyful party
the utter loneliness
loneliness of this visit and that riotous, joyful party of four years before.
the great listlessness
the merest commonplaces
sense of beauty around him, all desire, had flown away and the gaps they left were filled only with the great listlessness of his disillusion.
appeal to the worst in him.”
most of his bad nights, of which he felt this was to be one.
love’s exaltation
remained to him as payment for the loss of his youth—bitter calomel under the thin sugar of love’s exaltation.
bitter calomel
armchair by the open window.
sailing along the sea—” Yet he had no sense of waste, no sense of the present hope that waste implied.
“Rosalind! Rosalind
poured the words softly into the half-darkness until she seemed to permeate the room; the wet salt breeze filled his hair with moisture, the rim of a moon seared the sky and made the curtains dim and ghostly.
the wet salt breeze
touched his skin to find it damp and cold.
aware of a tense whispering not ten feet away.
a tense whispering
Alec’s voice
breathed very low, very frightened.
somewhere along the corridor outside.
mumbling of men’s voices and a repeated muffled rapping.
a repeated muffled rapping
men’s voices
close to the bathroom door.
the girl’s voice
the vermilion-lipped girl
a steady, insistent knocking
Amory’s hall door
Alec, followed by the vermilion-lipped girl.
clad in pajamas.
an anxious whisper
God, Amory—they’re just looking for a test-case—” “Well, better let them in.”
the Mann Act
get me under the Mann Act.”
a rather miserable, pathetic figure
get her out by this door.”
registered under my own name; besides, they’d trail the auto license number.”
one of the house detectives knows her.”
lay there listening wretchedly to the knocking which had grown gradually to a pounding.
a man’s voice
In the silence when this voice ceased Amory realized that there were other things in the room besides people.
stale, weak wine
the stirring curtains
window among the stirring curtains stood something else, featureless and indistinguishable, yet strangely familiar.
took place in his mind, then, occupied in actual time less than ten seconds.
the great impersonality
more to do with it than the date of the month.
the innocent one’s entire future
roommate in a gust of sentiment had taken the entire blame—due to the shame of it the innocent one’s entire future seemed shrouded in regret and failure, capped by the ingratitude of the real culprit.
the real culprit
had both puzzled and worried Amory.
carrying with it not a guarantee but a responsibility, not a security but an infinite risk.
a great elective office
one who made it high and dry forever on an island of despair.
hate him for having done so much for him.
those two breathless, listening forces
the gossamer aura
Sacrifice by its very nature was arrogant and impersonal; sacrifice should be eternally supercilious.
Weep not for me but for thy children.
surge of joy and then like a face in a motion-picture the aura over the bed faded out; the dynamic shadow by the window, that was as near as he could name it, remained for the fraction of a moment and then the breeze seemed to lift it swiftly out of the room.
clinched his hands in quick ecstatic excitement.
quick ecstatic excitement
tableau of anguish.
left Amory’s.
was another moment while they stared at each other.
beckoned peremptorily to the girl.
were in the bathroom with the door bolted behind them.
here with me,” he said sternly.
a burly man
man in a check suit.
“All right, Olson
said Olson, nodding.
withdrew, closing the door angrily behind them.
The burly man
hear of the Mann Act?
here with her,” he indicated the girl with his thumb, “with a New York license on your car—to a hotel like this.”
shook his head implying that he had struggled over Amory but now gave him up.
such a racket
retired to the bathroom.
Alec’s B.V.D.s
slipped into Alec’s B.V.D.s he found that his attitude toward the situation was agreeably humorous.
the burly man
virtue of the burly man made him want to laugh.
The aggrieved virtue
demanded Olson, trying to look keen and ferret-like.
Fellow who had the rooms,” said Amory carelessly.
drunk as an owl, though.
six o’clock
Been in there asleep since six o’clock.”
go upstairs with this woman.”
reappeared from the bathroom, completely if rather untidily arrayed.
that big-bully stuff
glared at him.
ease up on the nursery rhymes.
her tear-stained face
cupping her tear-stained face in her hands.
cried Amory at Olson.
An instant’s pause
Delivery, Rugway, New Hampshire.”
looked at them very ponderously.
over to the police and you’d go to penitentiary, you would, for bringin’ a girl from one State to ’nother f’r immoral purp’ses—” He paused to let the majesty of his words sink in.
immoral purp’ses
get in the papers,” cried Jill fiercely.
A great lightness
enormity of what he might have incurred.
the full enormity
much of this stuff, and we got a ’rangement with the newspapers so that you get a little free publicity.
a ’rangement
trouble in ’lantic City.
gettin’ off light—damn light—but—” “Come on,” said Amory briskly.
Alec’s still form
took a cursory glance at Alec’s still form.
a cursory glance
considered a piece of bravado—yielded finally.
tapped Olson on the arm.
lady in the elevator.”
Olson’s hat
the handsome young man
clerk and a few belated guests stared at them curiously; the loudly dressed girl with bent head, the handsome young man with his chin several points aloft; the inference was quite obvious.
a rather embarrassing two minutes
a few belated guests
the loudly dressed girl
machines whose drivers were presumably asleep inside.
the blurred outline
the girl’s arm
asked as they whirled along the dim street.
know about this—except our friends and enemies.”
said with a cheerful laugh.
a cheerful laugh
a big supper
sent up to the room about two o’clock.
about two o’clock
the little bastard
Jill’s low spirits
faster than the scattering night.
away from liquor, and when you want to get tight stay away from bedrooms.”
tapped suddenly at the glass and they drew up at the door of an all-night restaurant.
friend of yours?” asked Jill as they perched themselves on high stools inside, and set their elbows on the dingy counter.
high stools
the dingy counter
back in New York Amory found in a newspaper what he had been searching for—a dozen lines which announced to whom it might concern that Mr. Amory Blaine, who “gave his address” as, etc., had been requested to leave his hotel in Atlantic City because of entertaining in his room a lady not his wife.
was a longer paragraph of which the first words were: “Mr. and Mrs. Leland R. Connage are announcing the engagement of their daughter, Rosalind, to Mr. J. Dawson Ryder, of Hartford, Connecticut—” He dropped the paper and lay down on his bed with a frightened, sinking sensation in the pit of his stomach.
Mr. and Mrs. Leland R. Connage
mistake, that her heart ached only for the pain she had caused him.
the fresh radiance
luxury of wanting her—not this Rosalind, harder, older—nor any beaten, broken woman that his imagination brought to the door of his forties—Amory had wanted her youth, the fresh radiance of her mind and body, the stuff that she was selling now once and for all.
even the sombre luxury
not this Rosalind
harder, older—nor any beaten, broken woman
young Rosalind
far as he was concerned, young Rosalind was dead.
gone into the hands of receivers he could expect for the present no further remittances.
three more streetcar companies
a crisp, terse letter
no further remittances
a dazed Sunday night
Monsignor Darcy’s sudden death
told him of Monsignor Darcy’s sudden death in Philadelphia five days before.
stream of his life, all its glitterings and dirty shallows.
afraid of people and prejudice and misery and monotony.
his bitter heart
worse than this man or the next.
his own weakness
result of circumstances and environment; that often when he raged at himself as an egotist something would whisper ingratiatingly: “No. Genius!”
one manifestation
combination of those inexplicable grooves and twists in his mind, that any discipline would curb it to mediocrity.
those inexplicable grooves
more than any concrete vice or failing Amory despised his own personality—he loathed knowing that tomorrow and the thousand days after he would swell pompously at a compliment and sulk at an ill word like a third-rate musician or a first-class actor.
ashamed of the fact that very simple and honest people usually distrusted him; that he had been cruel, often, to those who had sunk their personalities in him—several girls, and a man here and there through college, that he had been an evil influence on; people who had followed him here and there into mental adventures from which he alone rebounded unscathed.
very simple and honest people
this consuming introspection
a startled baby
escape from this consuming introspection by thinking of children and the infinite possibilities of children—he leaned and listened and he heard a startled baby awake in a house across the street and lend a tiny whimper to the still night.
a tiny whimper
wondering with a touch of panic whether something in the brooding despair of his mood had made a darkness in its tiny soul.
the brooding despair
mad of that dark continent upon the moon.
shadowy secrets
approached dim communion
think too much about myself.”
desire to let himself go to the devil—not to go violently as a gentleman should, but to sink safely and sensuously out of sight.
an overwhelming desire
an olive-skinned, carmine-lipped girl
a rug-covered couch
melancholy undertones
his slender, artistic fingers
closed on a cigarette while he listened to guitars strumming melancholy undertones to an age-old dirge of Castile and an olive-skinned, carmine-lipped girl caressed his hair.
an age-old dirge
from every God (except the exotic Mexican one who was pretty slack himself and rather addicted to Oriental scents)—delivered from success and hope and poverty into that long chute of indulgence which led, after all, only to the artificial lake of death.
a strange litany
that long chute
many odors
sad, haunting music
life, where the shades of night skies and sunsets would seem to reflect only moods of passion: the colors of lips and poppies.
Phoebe’s room
man with the queer feet in Phoebe’s room had diminished to the aura over Jill.
the queer feet
fetidness of poverty, but no longer ferreted out the deeper evils in pride and sensuality.
lived; Monsignor was dead.
people who pretended to know, who knew nothing.
The mystical reveries
reveries of saints that had once filled him with awe in the still hours of night, now vaguely repelled him.
courage for the substance of wisdom.
costumed alumni
the nearest and most convenient food
thrown colored lights on his soul; each had tried to express the glory of life and the tremendous significance of man; each had boasted of synchronizing what had gone before into his own rickety generalities; each had depended after all on the set stage and the convention of the theatre, which is that man in his hunger for faith will feed his mind with the nearest and most convenient food.
his own rickety generalities
a world-old procession
whose unfathomable instincts
modes of art; whose unfathomable instincts, marvellously incoherent and inarticulate, he had thought to perpetuate in terms of experience—had become merely consecrations to their own posterity.
their own posterity
beauty, around which men had swarmed, from the possibility of contributing anything but a sick heart and a page of puzzled words to write.
several sweeping syllogisms
help from others on several sweeping syllogisms.
heirs of progress.
petty differences
agreeing against the ducking of witches—waiving the antitheses and approaching individually these men who seemed to be the leaders, he was repelled by the discrepancies and contradictions in the men themselves.
mutual heirs
leaned on the priest of another religion.
religion that explained even disbelief in terms of its own faith: if you doubted the devil it was the devil that made you doubt him.
even disbelief
strange and horrible insecurity
go to the houses of stolid philistines, read popular novels furiously, saturate himself in routine, to escape from that horror.
stolid philistines
priest, a little wiser, somewhat purer, had been, Amory knew, not essentially older than he.
escaped from a small enclosure into a great labyrinth.
a great labyrinth
Almayer’s Folly
was when he wrote Almayer’s Folly.
sorts of people who through natural clarity or disillusion left the enclosure and sought the labyrinth.
the direct pessimistic line
a strange, hidden orthodoxy
the other hand sword-like pioneering personalities
enter the labyrinth as stark souls; there were on the other hand sword-like pioneering personalities, Samuel Butler, Renan, Voltaire, who progressed much slower, yet eventually much further, not in the direct pessimistic line of speculative philosophy but concerned in the eternal attempt to attach a positive value to life.
stark souls
incurable romanticists
speculative philosophy
a strong distrust
time in his life to have a strong distrust of all generalities and epigrams.
reached the public after thirty years in some such form: Benson and Chesterton had popularized Huysmans and Newman; Shaw had sugarcoated Nietzsche and Ibsen and Schopenhauer.
conclusions of dead genius through someone else’s clever paradoxes and didactic epigrams.
didactic epigrams
a damned muddle
rushing wildly back, shouting that they had found it.
king—the élan vital—the principle of evolution.
a selfish man
sitting in the rain, a human creature of sex and pride, foiled by chance and his own temperament of the balm of love and children, preserved to help in building up the living consciousness of the race.
entrance of the labyrinth.
a night’s carouse
a belated taxi
shining like burning eyes in a face white from a night’s carouse.
A melancholy siren
sounded far down the river.
solemn high mass
the final absolutions
the British and Italian ambassadors
the papal delegate
the inexorable shears
his purple vestments
a haunting grief
lying in his coffin, with closed hands upon his purple vestments.
Amory’s dear old friend
daft, staring faces
people with daft, staring faces, the most exalted seeming the most stricken.
archangel in cope and mitre, sprinkled the holy water; the organ broke into sound; the choir began to sing the “Requiem Eternam.”
the “Requiem Eternam
depended upon Monsignor.
break in his walk,” as Wells put it.
Monsignor’s faith
finding cheer, of making religion a thing of lights and shadows, making all light and shadow merely aspects of God.
Amory’s attempted sacrifice
the full realization
funeral was born the romantic elf who was to enter the labyrinth with him.
the romantic elf
found in Burne.
one of its amazing bursts of radiance and Amory suddenly and permanently rejected an old epigram that had been playing listlessly in his mind: “Very few things matter and nothing matters very much.”
an old epigram
an immense desire
desire to give people a sense of security.
a colorless vault
day of dreams and far hopes and clear visions.
associated with those abstract truths and purities that dissolve in the sunshine or fade out in mocking laughter by the light of the moon.
sounds of the countryside had harmonized to a monotone, metallic as a trumpet, breathless as the Grecian urn.
the Grecian urn
classical severity
several motorists
such a contemplative mood
much annoyance
motorists who were forced to slow up considerably or else run him down.
cordiality manifested within fifty miles of Manhattan—when a passing car slowed down beside him and a voice hailed him.
a magnificent Locomobile
sat two middle-aged men, one of them small and anxious looking, apparently an artificial growth on the other who was large and begoggled and imposing.
some habitual, silent corroboration
glancing from the corner of his eye at the imposing man as if for some habitual, silent corroboration.
settled himself in the middle of the back seat.
confidence in himself set off against a tremendous boredom with everything around him.
a tremendous boredom
not undignified fat
rolls of not undignified fat had collected near his chin; somewhere above was a wide thin mouth and the rough model for a Roman nose, and, below, his shoulders collapsed without a struggle into the powerful bulk of his chest and belly.
speculating steadily but hopelessly some baffling hirsute problem.
some baffling hirsute problem
the chauffeur’s head
submersion in the personality of the other.
his complete submersion
that lower secretarial type
rest of their lives to secondhand mannerisms.
secondhand mannerisms
asked the smaller man in a pleasant disinterested way.
a pleasant disinterested way
Hiking for exercise?”
walking because I can’t afford to ride.”
’s lots of work,” he continued rather testily.
expressed the West with a sweeping, lateral gesture.
a sweeping, lateral gesture
agree wisely with something Amory had said, “now is the time of opportunity and business openings.”
lawyer grilling a witness glances involuntarily at the jury.
lot of money—” The little man laughed mirthlessly but conscientiously.
“A very natural, healthy desire
be rich without great effort—except the financiers in problem plays, who want to ‘crash their way through.’
contemplating socialism as possibly my forte.”
possibly my forte
glanced at him curiously.
These bomb throwers
lurched ponderously from the big man’s chest.
the big man’s chest
a bomb thrower
think of Socialists.”
Bolsheviks, one of these idealists?
these parlor Bolsheviks
stuff that stirs up the poor immigrants.”
the poor immigrants
is both safe and lucrative, I might try it.”
copy for an advertising agency.”
Lots of money in advertising.”
hash out ragtime for your theatres.
the great commercializing
a harmless, polite occupation
found a harmless, polite occupation for every genius who might have carved his own niche.
his own niche
artist who’s an intellectual also.
the Amory Blaine
Butler, the Amory Blaine—” “Who’s he?” demanded the little man suspiciously.
an intellectual personage
stopped rather suddenly as Amory’s burning eyes turned on him.
his conscientious laugh
Amory’s burning eyes
The little man’s eyes
knowledge of the race’s experience.”
the race’s experience
says bellboy, with no implication of youth, “has the usual muddled connotation of all popular words.”
the usual muddled connotation
fact that capital controls printing?” said the big man, fixing him with his goggles.
bunch of dubs who submitted to it.”
work from a man in the trades-unions.”
an honest day’s work
brought it on yourselves,” insisted Amory.
class I belonged to until recently; those who by inheritance or industry or brains or dishonesty have become the moneyed class.”
the moneyed class
that road-mender
money he’d be any more willing to give it up?”
continued Amory, “he’d be worse.
man of fair education,” began Amory slowly, “that is, when he marries he becomes, nine times out of ten, a conservative as far as existing social conditions are concerned.
a brainy man
be unselfish, kindhearted, even just in his own way, but his first job is to provide and to hold fast.
treadmill that hasn’t any windows.
an enclosed treadmill
a spiritually married man
book’ that pleased them; maybe they started on the treadmill as I did and were knocked off.
no social ambitions
aren’t just popular grab-bags for a half-dozen women and children.”
the disillusioned critic
old Thornton Hancock
critic like old Thornton Hancock, all the way to Trotsky.
magazine, the influential weekly—so that Mrs. Newspaper, Mrs. Magazine, Mrs. Weekly can have a better limousine than those oil people across the street or those cement people ’round the corner.”
unfortunately the spiritually married man
a better limousine
this spiritually unmarried man
the influential weekly
his family’s happiness
the world’s intellectual conscience
risk his family’s happiness by letting the clamor for another appear in his newspaper.”
wealthy men
the discredited mediums
Rotten cheap-papered weeklies
mixture of conditions of which the family is the first, there are these two sorts of brains.
takes human nature as it finds it, uses its timidity, its weakness, and its strength for its own ends.
man who, being spiritually unmarried, continually seeks for new systems that will control or counteract human nature.
the spiritually married man
part of progress—the spiritually married man is not.”
three big cigars
proffered them on his huge palm.
economic interdependence
changes no longer century by century, but year by year, ten times faster than it ever has before—populations doubling, civilizations unified more closely with other civilizations, economic interdependence, racial questions, and—we’re dawdling along.
laughed, too, after a pause.
a good physique
years in which she should have been preparing herself to educate her children, so much the worse for the child.
sent to these horrible tutoring schools, dragged through college.
these horrible tutoring schools
goggles indicating neither approval nor objection.
the best analytical business minds
minds in the government working for something besides themselves.
Morgans in the Treasury Department; we’d have Hills running interstate commerce.
said Amory, shaking his head.
’s in a man, even in America.”
the only stimulus
But if it were made illegal to have more than a certain amount the best men would all flock for the one other reward which attracts humanity—honor.”
sound that was very like boo.
thing you’ve said yet.”
a hundred petty honors
did who were earning their way through.”
child’s play
Kids—child’s play!” scoffed his antagonist.
a darned sight
’re all children.
jump when they hear the sound of the word.
growth, not an axiom.
done that for so long that we’ve forgotten there’s any other way.
world where that’s necessary.
nine out of ten of them would be trying for the blue ribbon.
That competitive instinct
badge they’ll sweat their heads off for that.
’s only a blue ribbon, I damn near believe they’ll work just as hard.
A fierce hiss
statistics of property owners and non-property owners; he decided to change the subject.
’re on dangerous ground.”
stalled off with promises.
the inspiring force
example of a beneficent violence, I suppose?”
a beneficent violence
overflowing just as the French Revolution did, but I’ve no doubt that it’s really a great experiment and well worth while.”
believe in moderation?”
listen to the moderates, and it’s almost too late.
those startling and amazing things
one of those startling and amazing things that they do about once in a hundred years.
man with much profundity, “and divided it up in equ—” “Oh, shut up!”
much profundity
went on with his argument.
the little man’s enraged stare
agree with one-half you’ve said.
beehive of corruption.
work for blue ribbons, that’s all rot.”
a determined nod
resolved this time to have his say out.
an owl-like look
things which are human nature,” he asserted with an owl-like look, “which always have been and always will be, which can’t be changed.”
looked from the small man to the big man helplessly.
discouraged with progress.
over one hundred natural phenomena
a hundred instincts
will of man—a hundred instincts in man that have been wiped out or are now held in check by civilization.
the associated muttonheads
the last refuge
refuge of the associated muttonheads of the world.
scientist, statesman, moralist, reformer, doctor, and philosopher that ever gave his life to humanity’s service.
humanity’s service
a flat impeachment
impeachment of all that’s worth while in human nature.
deprived of the franchise.”
remarks to the big man.
These quarter-educated, stale-minded men
find his type in the usual ghastly muddle.
the usual ghastly muddle
brutality and inhumanity of these Prussians’—the
these Prussians’—the
faith in these idealists.’
dreamer, not practical’—a year later they rail at him for making his dreams realities.
clear logical ideas on one single subject except a sturdy, stolid opposition to all change.
a sturdy, stolid opposition
the uneducated people
uneducated people
a broad grin
grin on his face leaned over and smiled at the little man.
ridiculous as to be beneath notice.
theory that people are fit to govern themselves rests on this man.
freed of his habit of taking refuge in platitudes and prejudices and sentimentalisms, then I’m a militant Socialist.
a militant Socialist
happens to man or his systems, now or hereafter.”
for in spite of going to college I’ve managed to pick up a good education.”
time in my life I’ve argued Socialism.
the only panacea
panacea I know.
sell his talents to a button manufacturer.
some man’s son
a furtive indulgence
had no talents I’d not be content to work ten years, condemned either to celibacy or a furtive indulgence, to give some man’s son an automobile.”
matter,” exclaimed Amory.
too many outworn systems
out of water in too many outworn systems.
men in my class at college who got a decent education; still they’d let any well-tutored flathead play football
any well-tutored flathead
thought we should all profit by conic sections.
love with change and I’ve killed my conscience—” “So you’ll go along crying that we must go faster.”
A laissez-faire policy
is like spoiling a child by saying he’ll turn out all right in the end.
all this Socialist patter
patter you talk.”
half of what I said.”
is the most exacting of all dramatists about his royalties.
the last farthing
product of a versatile mind in a restless generation—with every reason to throw my mind and pen in with the radicals.
a restless generation
a versatile mind
stroke of a pendulum, I and my sort would struggle against tradition; try, at least, to displace old cants with new ones.
seeking for the grail it may be a damned amusing game.”
a damned amusing game
expression of his goggles altered slightly.
been all along a sense of familiarity.
man who in college had borne off the crown that he had aspired to.
slowed up at the entrance to a great estate, ringed around by a huge hedge and a tall iron fence.
a huge hedge
more than outweighed any disfavor he had created by his opinions.
insisted on shaking hands.
shouted Mr. Ferrenby, as the car turned the corner and started up the drive.
cried Amory, smiling and waving his hand.
the Jersey roadside
looked at the frostbitten country.
the frostbitten country
Nature as a rather coarse phenomenon composed largely of flowers that, when closely inspected, appeared moth-eaten, and of ants that endlessly traversed blades of grass, was always disillusioning; nature represented by skies and waters and far horizons was more likable.
endlessly traversed blades
a rather coarse phenomenon
close around him, waiting to tap the shoulders of a Lewis gunner.
a Lewis gunner
subject of labyrinths which were, after all, the business of life.
somewhat the same primitive exaltation
quality that will change when I ‘see human suffering’ or ‘lose my parents’ or ‘help others.’
bring poise and balance into my life.
unselfishness that I cannot use.
drop of the milk of human kindness.”
solidified for Amory into the problem of sex.
identify evil with the strong phallic worship in Brooke and the early Wells.
the strong phallic worship
Eleanor’s voice
still a constant rising tumult
beauty—beauty, still a constant rising tumult; soft in Eleanor’s voice, in an old song at night, rioting deliriously through life like superimposed waterfalls, half rhythm, half darkness.
superimposed waterfalls
reached toward it longingly it had leered out at him with the grotesque face of evil.
the grotesque face
Beauty of great art, beauty of all joy, most of all the beauty of women.
associations with license and indulgence.
only a discord
this new loneness
loneness of his that had been selected for what greatness he might achieve, beauty must be relative or, itself a harmony, it would make only a discord.
step after his disillusion had been made complete.
this gradual renunciation
chance of being a certain type of artist.
thinking of the Catholic Church.
a certain intrinsic lack
strong in him that there was a certain intrinsic lack in those to whom orthodox religion was necessary, and religion to Amory meant the Church of Rome.
orthodox religion
bulwark against the decay of morals.
an empty ritual
the only assimilative, traditionary bulwark
cry: “Thou shalt not!”
the great mobs
ulterior pressure
absence of ulterior pressure.
wanted to keep the tree without ornaments, realize fully the direction and momentum of this new start.
good of three o’clock to the golden beauty of four.
walked through the dull ache of a setting sun when even the clouds seemed bleeding and at twilight he came to a graveyard.
the dull ache
moon in the sky and shadows everywhere.
a dusky, dreamy smell
a rusty iron vault
side of a hill; a vault washed clean and covered with late-blooming, weepy watery-blue flowers that might have grown from dead eyes, sticky to the touch with a sickening odor.
a sickening odor
late-blooming, weepy watery-blue flowers
consider life in vain.
find nothing hopeless in having lived.
clasped hands
speculate as to whether his eyes were brown or blue, and he hoped quite passionately that his grave would have about it an air of many, many years ago.
dead loves and dead lovers
the yellowish moss
think of dead loves and dead lovers, when they were exactly like the rest, even to the yellowish moss.
dead statesmen
the muddled, unchastened world
went on; the spirit of the past brooding over a new generation, the chosen youth from the muddled, unchastened world, still fed romantically on the mistakes and half-forgotten dreams of dead statesmen and poets.
go out into that dirty gray turmoil to follow love and pride; a new generation dedicated more than the last to the fear of poverty and the worship of success; grown up to find all Gods dead, all wars fought, all faiths in man shaken.
the old creeds
that dirty gray turmoil
sleep deep through many nights.
pain of memory; the regret for his lost youth—yet the waters of disillusion had left a deposit on his soul, responsibility and a love of life, the faint stirring of old ambitions and unrealized dreams.
old ambitions
unrealized dreams
the faint stirring
the crystalline, radiant sky
stretched out his arms to the crystalline, radiant sky.
He looked at it unmoved.
A good and virtuous nature may recoil In an imperial charge.
My dearest coz, I pray you, school yourself: but for your husband, He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows The fits o' the season.
That they did wake each other: I stood and heard them: But they did say their prayers, and address'd them Again to sleep.
The violence of either grief or joy Their own enactures with themselves destroy: Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament; Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
Kerry’s death was a blow, so was Jesse’s to a certain extent.
for her neck Kissed over close, wears yet a purple speck Wherein the pained blood falters and goes out; Soft and stung softly—fairer for a fleck.”
The very conveyances of his lands will hardly lie in this box; and must the inheritor himself have no more, ha?
The sea, he thought, had treasured its memories deeper than the faithless land.
This meant nothing to him, his metrical education having been confined to such Sunday classics as Come Into the Garden, Maude, and what morsels of Shakespeare and Milton had been recently forced upon him.
“Lots of money in advertising.”
He sold all his possessions and came down to the room to say goodbye, with a battered old bicycle, on which he intended to ride to his home in Pennsylvania.
The mystical reveries of saints that had once filled him with awe in the still hours of night, now vaguely repelled him.
Well, march we on, To give obedience where 'tis truly owed:
Use them after your own honour and dignity: the less they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty.
And thane of Cawdor too: went it not so?
“Not by a darned sight—unless we’re all children.
Ay, sir; to be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man picked out of ten thousand.
Dean Hollister had been heard by a large group arguing with a taxi-driver, who had driven him from the junction.
Till then sit still, my soul: foul deeds will rise, Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s eyes.
But you see, I’ve always felt that Stephen’s death was the thing that occurred to Paul on the road to Damascus, and sent him to preach the word of Christ all over the world.”
Who's there, i' the name of Beelzebub?
 Amory moved forward on the deck until he found a stool under an electric light.
Your wisdom should show itself more richer to signify this to his doctor; for, for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps plunge him into far more choler.
There were three private cars; however, no one slept except in the third car, which was called the “animal car,” and where were herded the spectacled windjammers of the orchestra.
“Well,” said Amory, “I simply state that I’m a product of a versatile mind in a restless generation—with every reason to throw my mind and pen in with the radicals.
The stag line is a most homogeneous mass of men.
cried the noisy man.
Amory stepped inside and divested himself of cap and coat.
Let our just censures Attend the true event, and put we on Industrious soldiership.
I knew that if I were the dog or the convict or the ghost I wouldn’t be a menace to Burne Holiday any more than he was a menace to me.
Los’ idealism, got be physcal anmal,” he shook his fist expressively at Old King Cole, “got be Prussian ’bout ev’thing, women ’specially.
What leered out of the dark in the ghostly clover?
“We’ll go over to Shanley’s,” suggested Carling, offering an elbow.
 Monsignor Darcy invited Amory up to the Stuart palace on the Hudson for a week at Christmas, and they had enormous conversations around the open fire.
It was cold, and he started on a steady run for the light that showed the street at the other end.
Existence had settled back to an ambitionless normality.
Within a week after the receipt of this letter their little household fell precipitously to pieces.
Every night the gymnasium echoed as platoon after platoon swept over the floor and shuffled out the basketball markings.
Why then, God's soldier be he!
This was followed by an indistinguishable song that included much stamping and then by an endless, incoherent dirge.
“They pick up old, moth-eaten London accents that are down on their luck and have to be used by someone.
He spelled out the name and title upside down—Marpessa, by Stephen Phillips.
On the contrary, Amory felt an immense desire to give people a sense of security.
What this man here just said has been for thousands of years the last refuge of the associated muttonheads of the world.
“No, sir, not by a darn sight,” said the worldly youth with emphasis, “and I know that girl’s as good as gold.
The Lord's anointed temple, and stole thence
Tom’s voice held an undertone of anxiety.
“I used to come out here alone at night, oh, three months ago, and I always stopped at that crossroad we just passed.
Her mother says that if you showed up by five-thirty you two was to go after ’em in the Packard.”
“You going out for anything?” inquired Amory of the elder brother.
“He’s way over their heads—you know you think so yourself when you talk to him—Good Lord, Tom, you used to stand out against ‘people.’
That now Sweno, the Norways' king, craves composition: Nor would we deign him burial of his men Till he disbursed at Saint Colme's inch Ten thousand dollars to our general use.
He wore no shoes, but, instead, a sort of half moccasin, pointed, though, like the shoes they wore in the fourteenth century, and with the little ends curling up.
As they settled to the lower floor the feet came into view in the sickly electric light of the paved hall.
To Ireland, I; our separated fortune Shall keep us both the safer: where we are, There's daggers in men's smiles: the near in blood, The nearer bloody.
At her best she allied all with whom she came in contact—except older girls and some women.
The worthy thane of Ross.
she speaks: I will set down what comes from her, to satisfy my remembrance the more strongly.
“Food—” she said with a cheerful laugh.
Eleanor was, say, the last time that evil crept close to Amory under the mask of beauty, the last weird mystery that held him with wild fascination and pounded his soul to flakes.
For this relief much thanks: ’tis bitter cold, And I am sick at heart.
with this background did Amory drift into adolescence.
They were like a slow dripping, with just the slightest insistence in their fall.
You brushed three or four ornaments down, and, in a fit of pique, knocked off the rest of them.
“Name of Kaluka, Hawaiian queen!
All the materialists rampant, all the idolizers of German science and efficiency.
I honestly think that’s all pretty much rot, though it seemed to give sentimental comfort to those at home; and may make fathers and mothers appreciate their children.
As long as he occurs, there’s trouble and all the latent evil that makes a crowd list and sway when he talks.”
He had risen at noon, lunched with Mrs. Lawrence, and then ridden abstractedly homeward atop one of his beloved buses.
“You’re one man, Burne—going to talk to people who won’t listen—with all God’s given you.”
That he is mad, ’tis true: ’tis true ’tis pity; And pity ’tis ’tis true: a foolish figure; But farewell it, for I will use no art.
They seemed nearer, not only mentally, but physically, when they read, than when she was in his arms, and this was often, for they fell half into love almost from the first.
Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame and start not so wildly from my affair.
They discussed the cousin thoroughly, and then Holiday announced that he was to meet his brother for dinner at six.
Then there’s always some crazy cross-eyed girl”—he gave a terrifying imitation—“she’s always talkin’ hard, sorta, to the chaperon.”
“To the celestial and my soul’s idol, the most beautified Ophelia,”—
Indeed, his mind was so crowded with dreams of athletic prowess at school that he considered this visit only as a rather tiresome prelude to the great adventure.
“Hey, ponies!”
Let’s follow; ’tis not fit thus to obey him.
They were at the head of the stairs, and as Amory turned into his room he thought he caught just the faintest cloud of discontent in her face.
Who cannot want the thought how monstrous It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain To kill their gracious father?
My pretty cousin, Blessing upon you!
Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead, Till of this flat a mountain you have made, To o’ertop old Pelion, or the skyish head Of blue Olympus.
Whate'er thou art, for thy good caution, thanks; Thou hast harp'd my fear aright: but one word more,—
New York burst upon him on Washington’s Birthday with the brilliance of a long-anticipated event.
But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?
Double, double toil and trouble; Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.
“Kids—child’s play!” scoffed his antagonist.
“Oh,” said Kerry respectfully, “these important men—” Amory flushed and it seemed to him that Ferrenby, a defeated competitor, winced a little.
Sailors, my lord, they say; I saw them not: They were given me by Claudio; he received them Of him that brought them.
He was where Goethe was when he began Faust; he was where Conrad was when he wrote Almayer’s Folly.
“Morning, Mr. Barlow.”
Though Birnam wood be come to Dunsinane, And thou opposed, being of no woman born, Yet I will try the last.
Methinks it is like a weasel.
Not in the legions Of horrid hell can come a devil more damn'd
She was enjoying this immensely, and Froggy Parker was so engrossed with the added sparkle of her rising color that he forgot to pull out Sally’s chair, and fell into a dim confusion.
What a wonderful song, she thought—everything was wonderful tonight, most of all this romantic scene in the den, with their hands clinging and the inevitable looming charmingly close.
The day had put Amory in such a contemplative mood that he caused much annoyance to several motorists who were forced to slow up considerably or else run him down.
“Well,” began Tom, “it seems that the idea developed simultaneously in several heads.
Anybody that’d risk what you were in line for ought to be ineligible for Princetonian chairman.”
At five o’clock he felt the need of hearing his own voice, so he retreated to his house to see if anyone else had arrived.
Browsing in her library, Amory found a tattered gray book out of which fell a yellow sheet that he impudently opened.
“Wells, I guess, and Tolstoy, and a man named Edward Carpenter.
The phrase would be more german to the matter, if we could carry cannon by our sides: I would it might be hangers till then.
One woe doth tread upon another’s heel, So fast they follow: your sister’s drown’d, Laertes.
Here had we now our country's honour roof'd, Were the graced person of our Banquo present; Who may I rather challenge for unkindness Than pity for mischance!
“Well—” “Goodbye.”
Human beings can’t go ‘tump-tump-tump’ without going crazy.”
Burne stood vaguely for a land Amory hoped he was drifting toward—and it was almost time that land was in sight.
 From the scoffing superiority of sixth-form year and success Amory looked back with cynical wonder on his status of the year before.
As thick as hail Came post with post; and every one did bear Thy praises in his kingdom's great defence, And pour'd them down before him.
What's the newest grief?
Thunder rolled with menacing crashes up the valley and scattered through the woods in intermittent batteries.
“Why write books to prove he started the war—or that that stupid, overestimated Schiller is a demon in disguise?”
So he found Dorian Gray and the Mystic and Somber Dolores and the Belle Dame sans Merci; for a month was keen on naught else.
Moreover, amateur standing had very little value in the game they were playing, a game that would presumably be her principal study for years to come.
So far as he was concerned, young Rosalind was dead.
But, my lord, his majesty bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager on your head: sir, this is the matter—
The night and the scarred trees were like scenery in a play, and to be there with Eleanor, shadowy and unreal, seemed somehow oddly familiar.
In a sense this gradual renunciation of beauty was the second step after his disillusion had been made complete.
You’re all right—you’re a rubber ball, and somehow it suits you, but I’m sick of adapting myself to the local snobbishness of this corner of the world.
There a few gray-haired men sat and talked quietly while the classes swept by in panorama of life.
If chance will have me king, why, chance may crown me, Without my stir.
In ten minutes Amory was devouring cornflakes in Renwick’s, and at nine-thirty they bowled happily out of town, headed for the sands of Deal Beach.
Ay, my lord; So you will not o’errule me to a peace.
Am I not i’ the right, old Jephthah?
What he said, his attitude toward life, toward her, toward himself, were all reflexes of the dead Englishman’s literary moods.
Amory did not entirely agree with Tom’s sweeping damnation of American novelists and poets.
Say to the king the knowledge of the broil As thou didst leave it.
There’s probably as much corruption in zinc-made money as brass-made money.
This trouble pleased her, and later she made use of it as an intrinsic part of her atmosphere—especially after several astounding bracers.
“Don’t remember them all—besides my name isn’t Madeline, it’s Eleanor.”
Eventually she had decided to marry for background, and the young pagan from Asheville had gone through a spiritual crisis, joined the Catholic Church, and was now—Monsignor Darcy.
Yet here she is allow’d her virgin crants, Her maiden strewments and the bringing home Of bell and burial.
What art thou that usurp’st this time of night, Together with that fair and warlike form In which the majesty of buried Denmark Did sometimes march?
Amory called a greeting and descending a flight of wooden steps approached the car.
Ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that Which might appal the devil.
I possess the most valuable experience, the experience of the race, for in spite of going to college I’ve managed to pick up a good education.”
Mine and my father’s death come not upon thee, Nor thine on me!
(Pours the poison into the sleeper’s ears.)
“It’s going down my neck, fellow lunatic,” she offered finally.
Prithee, peace: I dare do all that may become a man; Who dares do more is none.
Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric; I am justly kill’d with mine own treachery.
The slickers of that year had adopted tortoiseshell spectacles as badges of their slickerhood, and this made them so easy to recognize that Amory and Rahill never missed one.
“All—your—wonderful words Thrill me through—” The violins swelled and quavered on the last notes, the girl sank to a crumpled butterfly on the stage, a great burst of clapping filled the house.
I wanted to come out here with you because I thought you were the best-looking girl in sight.
With the instinct of a child Amory edged in under the blue darkness of the white buildings, cleaving the moonlight for haggard seconds, once bursting into a slow run with clumsy stumblings.
He awoke laughing and his eyes lazily roamed his surroundings, evidently a bedroom and bath in a good hotel.
They dressed and ate breakfast in silence, and then sauntered out to get some air.
“And you’re holding my hand, which is dangerous without seeing my face.”
It was a day easily associated with those abstract truths and purities that dissolve in the sunshine or fade out in mocking laughter by the light of the moon.
From Fife, great king; Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky And fan our people cold.
“Victorians, Victorians, who never learned to weep Who sowed the bitter harvest that your children go to reap—” scribbled Amory in his notebook.
Tom and Amory, bound in the morning for different training-camps, paced the shadowy walks as usual and seemed still to see around them the faces of the men they knew.
Phyllis’s feelings as she was paraded by the Harvard and Princeton stands, where sat dozens of her former devotees, can be imagined.
They say Bernard Shaw, in spite of his doctrines, is the most exacting of all dramatists about his royalties.
a puzzled, furtive interest in everything concerning sex.
And, for that purpose, I’ll anoint my sword.
In every store where she had ever traded she was whispered about as the beautiful Mrs. Page.
They were the Blaines of Lake Geneva; they had quite enough relatives to serve in place of friends, and an enviable standing from Pasadena to Cape Cod.
“Oh, Dick Humbird and Kerry Holiday and Jesse Ferrenby
This same skull, sir, was Yorick’s skull, the king’s jester.
Touching this vision here, It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you: For your desire to know what is between us, O’ermaster’t as you may.
I would not have such a heart in my bosom for the dignity of the whole body.
Come to my woman's breasts, And take my milk for gall, you murdering ministers, Wherever in your sightless substances You wait on nature's mischief!
Indeed, he had had no definite reason for coming to the coast.
All tragedy has that strain of the grotesque and squalid—so useless, futile.
 Two mornings later he knocked at the president’s door at Bascome and Barlow’s advertising agency.
The invitation to Miss Myra St. Claire’s bobbing party spent the morning in his coat pocket, where it had an intense physical affair with a dusty piece of peanut brittle.
For better or worse we’ve stamped you; you’re a Princeton type!”
When Amory had the whooping-cough four disgusted specialists glared at each other hunched around his bed; when he took scarlet fever the number of attendants, including physicians and nurses, totalled fourteen.
Never to speak of this that you have seen, Swear by my sword.
So, thanks to all at once and to each one, Whom we invite to see us crown'd at Scone.
“It’s gone now,” came Tom’s voice after a second in a still terror.
Are we going to surely catch up with ’em before they get there?”
A worthy pioner!
Dimly he promised himself a time where all should be welded together.
A whole one, I. For thou dost know, O Damon dear, This realm dismantled was Of Jove himself; and now reigns here A very, very—pajock.
Mother always feels the girl is safe if she’s with me.
So they proceeded with an infinite guile that would have horrified her parents.
If it be mine, Keep it not from me, quickly let me have it.
“You can get one of those taxis and beat it,” said Olson, pointing to the blurred outline of two machines whose drivers were presumably asleep inside.
Your servants ever Have theirs, themselves and what is theirs, in compt, To make their audit at your highness' pleasure, Still to return your own.
I often think over what you said on that night and wonder how much you meant.
Horatio, thou art e’en as just a man As e’er my conversation coped withal.
“No, I’m thinking about myself—my black old inside self, the real one, with the fundamental honesty that keeps me from being absolutely wicked by making me realize my own sins.”
He moved his bed so that the sun would wake him at dawn that he might dress and go out to the archaic swing that hung from an apple-tree near the sixth-form house.
Amory wandered occasionally to New York on the chance of finding a new shining green autobus, that its stick-of-candy glamour might penetrate his disposition.
He was proud of the fact that he could never become a mechanical or scientific genius.
The man in the street heard the conclusions of dead genius through someone else’s clever paradoxes and didactic epigrams.
Ay, marry, is’t; crowner’s quest law.
In what particular thought to work I know not; But in the gross and scope of my opinion, This bodes some strange eruption to our state.
Anything which brought an under classman into too glaring a light was labelled with the damning brand of “running it out.”
His head was whirring and picture after picture was forming and blurring and melting before his eyes, but beyond the desire to laugh he had no entirely conscious reaction.
But come; Here, as before, never, so help you mercy, How strange or odd soe’er
He differed from the healthy type that was essentially middle class—he never seemed to perspire.
He hemmed several times and looked consciously kind, as a man will when he knows he’s on delicate ground.
Next he was sleepy, and he had a hazy, listless sense of people in dress suits, probably waiters, gathering around the table.
I will not be afraid of death and bane, Till Birnam forest come to Dunsinane.
At least we'll die with harness on our back.
Your castle is surprised; your wife and babes Savagely slaughter'd: to relate the manner, Were, on the quarry of these murder'd deer, To add the death of you.
“They shuddered when they found what Mr. Darwin was about, They shuddered when the waltz came in and Newman hurried out—” But the waltz came in much earlier; he crossed that out.
This diamond he greets your wife withal, By the name of most kind hostess; and shut up In measureless content.
It is backed like a weasel.
A calm virility and a dreamy humor, marked contrasts to her level-headedness—into these moods she slipped sometimes as a refuge.
Than is his father's, must embrace the fate Of that dark hour.
Amory, his head spinning gorgeously, layer upon layer of soft satisfaction setting over the bruised spots of his spirit, was discoursing volubly on the war.
Take thy fair hour, Laertes; time be thine, And thy best graces spend it at thy will!
So he took Axia’s arm and, piling intimately into a taxicab, they drove out over the hundreds and drew up at a tall, white-stone apartment-house.
“Didn’t you ever hear of the Mann Act?
With greatest affection, Thayer Darcy.
Young fry of treachery!
Isabelle’s face was a study in enraptured curiosity.
Your royal father 's murder'd.
He had a sense of reality such as material things could never give him.
Thirty-five dollars a week—less than a good carpenter.”
This orgy of sociability culminated in a gigantic party at the Nassau Inn, where punch was dispensed from immense bowls, and the whole downstairs became a delirious, circulating, shouting pattern of faces and voices.
“Yes,” said Axia, coming in, “and Amory.
Somehow he could find nothing hopeless in having lived.
“Oh, he’s having a frightful time.”
This grave shall have a living monument: An hour of quiet shortly shall we see; Till then, in patience our proceeding be.
Shaw’s aloof clarity and brilliant consistency and the gloriously intoxicated efforts of H. G. Wells to fit the key of romantic symmetry into the elusive lock of truth, alone won his rapt attention.
None of the Victorian mothers—and most of the mothers were Victorian—had any idea how casually their daughters were accustomed to be kissed.
Why, one that swears and lies.
“I’ve just come from school—St. Regis’s, you know.”
Then the insistent voice of the old crone in a sort of croaking triumph: “He’s quite dead, all right.
Then Amory opened his eyes, half afraid that sight would spoil the rich illusion of harmony.
and 'Amen' the other; As they had seen me with these hangman's hands.
but as pictures: 'tis the eye of childhood That fears a painted devil.
To the selfsame tune and words.
Myra pictured an all-night tobacco debauch, with Amory pale and reeling from the effect of nicotined lungs.
Amory sprawled on a couch.
Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat In this distracted globe.
I think that comes in our programme about five o’clock.”
“What are you,” asked the big man, “one of these parlor Bolsheviks, one of these idealists?
Faint winds, and far away a fading laughter.”
Sudden revulsion seized Amory, disgust, loathing for the whole incident.
They told him in all earnestness that he had a mind like Shelley’s, and featured his ultrafree free verse and prose poetry in the Nassau Literary Magazine.
There was something fascinating about Myra, shut away here cosily from the dim, chill air.
Afterward they suppered on ginger ale and devil’s food in the pantry, and Amory announced a decision.
“It just seemed an easy way out of everything—when I think of another useless, draggy year.”
“You are tall—but you’re still very handsome—you’ve skipped the awkward age, or is that sixteen; perhaps it’s fourteen or fifteen; I can never remember; but you’ve skipped it.”
Your constancy Hath left you unattended.
Maybe their wives have no social ambitions; maybe they’ve hit a sentence or two in a ‘dangerous book’ that pleased them; maybe they started on the treadmill as I did and were knocked off.
 She paused at the top of the staircase.
for from broad words and 'cause he fail'd His presence at the tyrant's feast, I hear Macduff lives in disgrace: sir, can you tell Where he bestows himself?
“Swinburne’s ‘Song in the Time of Order’ might well have been Tennyson’s title.
I find thee apt; And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf, Wouldst thou not stir in this.
“It’s the one dividing line between good and evil.
He found it impossible to study conic sections; something in their calm and tantalizing respectability breathing defiantly through Mr. Rooney’s fetid parlors distorted their equations into insoluble anagrams.
Amory opened with grapeshot.
The club presidents are holding a meeting tonight to see if they can find a joint means of combating it.”
Double, double toil and trouble; Fire burn and cauldron bubble.
“I knew you’d come tonight,” she said softly, “like summer, just when I needed you most.
As an actress even in the fullest flush of her own conscious magnetism gets a deep impression of most of the people in the front row, so Isabelle sized up her antagonist.
He found that 12 University Place was a large, dilapidated mansion, at present apparently uninhabited, though he knew it housed usually a dozen freshmen.
His mouth was the kind that is called frank, and he had steady gray eyes that moved slowly from one to the other of their group, with just the shade of a questioning expression.
Our duty to your honour.
And, for an earnest of a greater honour, He bade me, from him, call thee thane of Cawdor: In which addition, hail, most worthy thane!
The sudden dawns we laughed to greet, That all could see, that none could share, Will be but dawns.
“There’s so much spring in the air—there’s so much lazy sweetness in your heart.”
With affectionate regards, Thayer Darcy.
Was’t Hamlet wrong’d Laertes?
“Just to be dramatic, I’ll let you know that if it’s blue, my name is withdrawn from the editorial board of the Prince, and my short career is over.”
Thriftless ambition, that wilt ravin up Thine own life's means!
“You’re a slave, a bound helpless slave to one thing in the world, your imagination.”
you speak like a green girl, Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
The raven himself is hoarse That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan Under my battlements.
“But it took about ten thousand dollars to educate me where I could write your darned stuff for you.
On their heads were rakish college hats, pinned up in front and sporting bright orange-and-black bands, while from their celluloid collars blossomed flaming orange ties.
I’m sure you would revel in it.
“You’re mistaking this period when every nut is an individualist for a period of individualism.
Amory decided to sit for a while on the front steps, so he bade them good night.
This was allowing for the walk from her house—a walk concerning which he had afterward not the faintest recollection.
Phoebe reappeared with sandwiches, brandy bottle, siphon, and four glasses.
If it’s only a blue ribbon, I damn near believe they’ll work just as hard.
Shall I strike at it with my partisan?
He could not sleep, so he turned on his reading-lamp and, taking down the Kreutzer Sonata, searched it carefully for the germs of Burne’s enthusiasm.
And then Eleanor had part of another verse that she couldn’t find a beginning for: “But wisdom passes.
They curved tantalizingly, and she could catch just a glimpse of two pairs of masculine feet in the hall below.
[Aside] Two truths are told, As happy prologues to the swelling act Of the imperial theme.—I thank you, gentlemen.
As the door shut behind him, Amory stood a moment with his back against it.
There was one brilliant place in Ha-Ha Hortense!
Amory marked himself a fortunate youth, capable of infinite expansion for good or evil.
Macduff, this noble passion, Child of integrity, hath from my soul Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts To thy good truth and honour.
“Oh, Alec, I believe I’m tired of college,” he said sadly, as they walked the dusk together.
“Heard the latest?” said Tom, coming in late one drizzly evening with that triumphant air he always wore after a successful conversational bout.
did he not straight In pious rage the two delinquents tear, That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep?
“Well, the next one?” “What—ah—er—I swear I’ve got to go cut in—look me up when she’s got a dance free.”
Of all men else I have avoided thee: But get thee back; my soul is too much charged With blood of thine already.
Thou wast born of woman But swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn,
Thou pray’st not well.
He used to go for far walks by himself—and wander along reciting “Ulalume” to the cornfields, and congratulating Poe for drinking himself to death in that atmosphere of smiling complacency.
falling behind the Groton goal with two men on his legs, in the only touchdown of the game.
Strange damps—full of the eyes of many men, crowded with life borne in upon a lull.
This took his mind off the play, and he wondered if he really did seem handsome to the population of New York.
The crowd around the table thickened.
It put them on equal terms, although she was quite capable of staging her own romances, with or without advance advertising.
Wretched queen, adieu!
There are times when I think of the men out there as Roman legionaries, miles from their corrupt city, stemming back the hordes.
they were nervous hands that sat lightly along the cushions and moved constantly with little jerky openings and closings.
Season your admiration for a while With an attent ear, till I may deliver, Upon the witness of these gentlemen, This marvel to you.
“Rotten, rotten old world,” broke out Eleanor suddenly, “and the wretchedest thing of all is me—oh, why am I a girl?
I could interpret between you and your love, if I could see the puppets dallying.
He was unaware that his failure to be cockney was ruining his standing.
To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow, Creeps in this petty pace from day to day To the last syllable of recorded time, And all our yesterdays have lighted fools The way to dusty death.
They set off at a good gait, and for an hour swung along in a brisk argument until the lights of Princeton were luminous white blots behind them.
I mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation laid on him by them, in his meed he’s unfellowed.
Her words began ringing in his ears: “Don’t ever forget me, Amory—don’t ever forget me—” “Hell!”
And can you, by no drift of circumstance, Get from him why he puts on this confusion, Grating so harshly all his days of quiet With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?
Make we our march towards Birnam.
O, yet I do repent me of my fury, That I did kill them.
Ourself will mingle with society, And play the humble host.
He had shown off one day in French class (he was in senior French class) to the utter confusion of Mr. Reardon, whose accent Amory damned contemptuously, and to the delight of the class.
Burne hurried on, and it was several days before Amory heard an account of the ensuing conversation.
Listening their fear, I could not say 'Amen,' When they did say 'God bless us!'
Eleanor Savage, materiologist—no jumping, no starting, come early—” “But I have to have a soul,” he objected.
And, I believe, it is a fetch of wit: You laying these slight sullies on my son, As ’twere a thing a little
At the best I can have my choice from one or two cities and, of course, I have to marry into a dinner-coat.
She had begun as he had, with good looks and an excitable temperament, and the rest was the result of accessible popular novels and dressing-room conversation culled from a slightly older set.
He enjoyed both Vachel Lindsay and Booth Tarkington, and admired the conscientious, if slender, artistry of Edgar Lee Masters.
Amory knew that every time he had reached toward it longingly it had leered out at him with the grotesque face of evil.
let me see: We’ll make a solemn wager on your cunnings: I ha’t.
The latter was a quiet, rather aloof slicker from Hotchkiss, who lived next door and shared the same enforced singleness as Amory, due to the fact that his entire class had gone to Yale.
It gave a musical comedy every year, travelling with cast, chorus, orchestra, and scenery all through Christmas vacation.
A pestilence on him for a mad rogue!
“How much or how little I’m taking this stand because of propaganda I’ve heard, I don’t know; naturally I think that it’s my most innermost conviction—it seems a path spread before me just now.”
He found himself reading the same paragraphs over and over, so he abandoned this attempt and leaning over wearily pressed his hot forehead against the damp windowpane.
Amory watched them in fascination.
He stepped into the hall and then waited at the top of the stairs, for he heard footsteps coming.
Langueduc lazily shifts his six-foot-three of football material and tries to concentrate.
My thanes and kinsmen, Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland In such an honour named.
We can attract people, we can make atmosphere, we can almost lose our Celtic souls in Celtic subtleties, we can almost always have our own way; but splendid—rather not!
Amory was in full stride, confident, nervous, and jubilant.
Amory’s heart sank.
To Amory it was a haunting grief to see him lying in his coffin, with closed hands upon his purple vestments.
“And this very walking at night is one of the things I was afraid about.
In the spring he read L’Allegro, by request, and was inspired to lyrical outpourings on the subject of Arcady and the pipes of Pan.
“They say Overton fainted when he got his Ivy bid—Did he sign up the first day?—oh, no.
“I don’t agree with you—I don’t believe in ‘muscular Christianity.’ ” “I do—I believe Christ had great physical vigor.”
Or that the Everlasting had not fix’d His canon ’gainst self-slaughter!
He fancied himself an athlete of possibilities and a supple dancer.
The time is out of joint: O cursed spite, That ever I was born to set it right!
“He dances as if the girl were on his back instead of in his arms.”
Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck, Till thou applaud the deed.
The truth is that the public has done one of those startling and amazing things that they do about once in a hundred years.
She took a nail scissors, clipped out the ‘My God’ and showed the rest of the letter all over school.
thy face is valanced since I saw thee last: comest thou to beard me in Denmark?
make thick my blood; Stop up the access and passage to remorse, That no compunctious visitings of nature Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between The effect and it!
 “All right, ponies!”
Before my body I throw my warlike shield.
There was no need to ask what girl he referred to.
“Oh, I suppose heaven would, if there was one,” she said finally, “a sort of pagan heaven—you ought to be a materialist,” she continued irrelevantly.
the invisible king—the élan vital—the principle of evolution.
Especially as father says the money isn’t forthcoming as it used to be.”
It’s the only panacea I know.
“Because it’s a gentleman’s school, and democracy won’t hit you so early.
Disdaining fortune, with his brandish'd steel, Which smoked with bloody execution, Like valour's minion carved out his passage Till he faced the slave;
[Aside] Glamis, and thane of Cawdor!
Oh, she was magnificent—pale skin, the color of marble in starlight, slender brows, and eyes that glittered green as emeralds in the blinding glare.
that made them vaguely wonder why it did not sound quite clear, but never question that it was the utterance of a supersoul.
A last burst of singing flooded up from Blair Arch—broken voices for some long parting.
“It’s a man—don’t you know?”
At this Isabelle’s little fist had clinched suddenly under the fur robe.
“Servant-girls are that way,” says Mrs. Huston-Carmelite to her popular daughter.
“But think of the cheapness of it—no one’s really going to martyr you for being a pacifist—it’s just going to throw you in with the worst—” “I doubt it,” he interrupted.
and like a sombre background lay that incident of the spring before, that filled half his nights with a dreary terror and made him unable to pray.
He was awakened by a woman clinging to him, a pretty woman, with brown, disarranged hair and dark blue eyes.
All through supper he addressed her in the most respectful language, while Kerry made idiotic love to her on the other side, and she giggled and grinned.
This particular day on which he announced his ennui to Tom had been quite typical.
Ay, my good lord: safe in a ditch he bides, With twenty trenched gashes on his head; The least a death to nature.
Nor do we find him forward to be sounded, But, with a crafty madness, keeps aloof, When we would bring him on to some confession Of his true state.
The room was in darkness except for the faint glow of Tom’s cigarette where he lounged by the open window.
finally bruised and weary, but still elusive, circling an end, twisting, changing pace, straight-arming.
 “Here, Earthborn, over the lilt of the water, Lisping its music and bearing a burden of light, Bosoming day as a laughing and radiant daughter.
So all my words, however true, might sing you to a thousandth June, and no one ever know that you were Beauty for an afternoon.
Wilson has only been powerful when he has represented; he’s had to compromise over and over again.
Froggy had fallen twenty-five places in one hour.
Give first admittance to the ambassadors; My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.
Ernest Poole and Dorothy Canfield try but they’re hindered by their absolute lack of any sense of humor; but at least they crowd their work instead of spreading it thin.
“He may vary from the disillusioned critic like old Thornton Hancock, all the way to Trotsky.
Scurrying back to Minneapolis to see a girl he had known as a child seemed the interesting and romantic thing to do, so without compunction he wired his mother not to expect him.
Once a day Amory indulged in a club sandwich, cornflakes, and Julienne potatoes at Joe’s, accompanied usually by Kerry or Alec Connage.
O good Horatio, what a wounded name, Things standing thus unknown, shall live behind me!
“Better drift, like me.
You start as a messenger or a teller, I believe, and from that you go up—almost indefinitely.
They look like an old man’s home.”
In fact, Beatrice wrote that she was putting the money into railroad and streetcar bonds as fast as she could conveniently transfer it.
Then their lips brushed like young wild flowers in the wind.
Amory saw him about once a week, and together they gilded the ceiling of Tom’s room and decorated the walls with imitation tapestry, bought at an auction, tall candlesticks and figured curtains.
Let's after him, Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome: It is a peerless kinsman.
“Turn down this side street, Richard, and drive straight to the Minnehaha Club!”
“I’m rather pagan at present.
Why, let the stricken deer go weep, The hart ungalled play; For some must watch, while some must sleep: So runs the world away.
He waited on the doorstep with his eyes nonchalantly half-closed, and planned his entrance with precision.
Quick as a flash he turned away, wondering with a touch of panic whether something in the brooding despair of his mood had made a darkness in its tiny soul.
No more to wait the twilight of the moon in this sequestered vale of star and spire, for one eternal morning of desire passes to time and earthy afternoon.
Spires, against a sky that’s a promise of dawn, and blue light on the slate roofs—it hurts.
What, the fair Ophelia!
What's the business, That such a hideous trumpet calls to parley The sleepers of the house?
ah fie! ’tis an unweeded garden, That grows to seed; things rank and gross in nature
It was like weakness in a good woman, or blood on satin; one of those terrible incongruities that shake little things in the back of the brain.
Gonzago is the duke’s name; his wife, Baptista: you shall see anon; ’tis a knavish piece of work: but what o’ that?
With visitors from Ivy and Cottage and Tiger Inn he played the “nice, unspoilt, ingenuous boy” very much at ease and quite unaware of the object of the call.
“Just the same, I can only cut six more classes, with over a month and a half to go.”
This, it seemed, usually aroused the jealous suspicions of the next borrower.
“You two order; Phoebe and I are going to shake a wicked calf,” and they sailed off in the muddled crowd.
“No—I’m through—as far as ever being a power in college is concerned.”
a harsh phrase from the lips of an older boy (older boys usually detested him) was liable to sweep him off his poise into surly sensitiveness, or timid stupidity.
Somehow the quiet Humbird, and Sloane, with his impatient superciliousness, were the centre.
Olson walked through the bathroom and took a cursory glance at Alec’s still form.
and I will still shout our futilities to each other across the stage until the last silly curtain falls plump!
“When I had my last breakdown”—she spoke of it as a sturdy, gallant feat.
Her goodness was above the prosy morals of the husband-seeker, apart from the dull literature of female virtue.
There the man half sat, half leaned against a pile of pillows on the corner divan.
Yet all thought usually reached the public after thirty years in some such form: Benson and Chesterton had popularized Huysmans and Newman; Shaw had sugarcoated Nietzsche and Ibsen and Schopenhauer.
Give me your favour: my dull brain was wrought With things forgotten.
She was accustomed to be thus followed by her desperate past, and it never failed to rouse in her the same feeling of resentment; yet—in a strange town it was an advantageous reputation.
Mackenzie, Chesterton, Galsworthy, Bennett, had sunk in his appreciation from sagacious, life-saturated geniuses to merely diverting contemporaries.
He thought back through two years, of Burne as a hurried, nervous freshman, quite submerged in his brother’s personality.
“Here you are, Juan,” cried she of the damp hair.
He stretched out his arms to the crystalline, radiant sky.
whose phrase of sorrow Conjures the wandering stars, and makes them stand Like wonder-wounded hearers?
Casey-Jones—mounted to the cab-un Took his farewell journey to the promised land.”
By the great commercializing of printing you’ve found a harmless, polite occupation for every genius who might have carved his own niche.
I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late innovation.
“Oh, golly, Tom!”
On the return he launched into a discussion of will.
She works in a Jam Factoree And—that-may-be-all-right
She had once been a Catholic, but discovering that priests were infinitely more attentive when she was in process of losing or regaining faith in Mother Church, she maintained an enchantingly wavering attitude.
or is it a fee-grief Due to some single breast?
For the first time he came into actual cognizance of the family finances, and realized what a tidy fortune had once been under his father’s management.
They had bought flaring suits with huge peg-top trousers and gigantic padded shoulders.
He sat in the big chair and held out his arms so that she could nestle inside them.
But I love you—or adore you—or worship you—” “There you go—running through your catalogue of emotions in five seconds.”
In self-reproach and loneliness and disillusion he came to the entrance of the labyrinth.
For the first time in his life he rather longed for death to roll over his generation, obliterating their petty fevers and struggles and exultations.
And, sometimes, even chapel lures That conscious tolerance of yours, That broad and beaming view of truth (Including Kant and General Booth.)
They were a darkish brown and his toes seemed to fill them to the end.
“Listen to the beat of our horses’ hoofs—‘tump-tump-tump-a-tump.’
“There’s always a bunch of shy fellas,” he commented, “sitting at the tail of the bob, sorta lurkin’ an’ whisperin’ an’ pushin’ each other off.
Amory winced, and wondered how this would have sounded to Froggy Parker.
That it might please you to give quiet pass Through your dominions for this enterprise, On such regards of safety and allowance As therein are set down.
He had never kissed a girl before, and he tasted his lips curiously, as if he had munched some new fruit.
Here’s the old jitney waiter.
Look, how she rubs her hands.
When he ceased the little man spoke up with a determined nod, as if resolved this time to have his say out.
For a delicious hour that passed too soon they glided the silent roads about Princeton and talked from the surface of their hearts in shy excitement.
Maybe I’ll play—but Rosalind was the only girl in the wide world that could have held me.”
Thou art the best o' the cut-throats: yet he's good That did the like for Fleance:
From the Country Club steps the roads stretched away, dark creases on the white blanket; huge heaps of snow lining the sides like the tracks of giant moles.
I hope we have reformed that indifferently with us, sir.
They rejoiced, for she was a brave raconteuse, but many were the keys turned in sideboard locks that night against the possible defection of little Bobby or Barbara.
Quite conceivably it was an empty ritual but it was seemingly the only assimilative, traditionary bulwark against the decay of morals.
By the pricking of my thumbs, Something wicked this way comes.
I'll see no more: And yet the eighth appears, who bears a glass Which shows me many more; and some I see That two-fold balls and treble scepters carry: Horrible sight!
It was a mumbling of men’s voices and a repeated muffled rapping.
O gentle lady, 'Tis not for you to hear what I can speak: The repetition, in a woman's ear, Would murder as it fell.
“But who, O, who had seen the mobled queen—”
